{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf190
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 AvenirNext-Regular;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\info
{\title EthicsInfoSheet}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\vieww15620\viewh11400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl700\sa254

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Chemicals and Their Users in the British Home, 1930s - 1980s
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\f0 \cf0 You are invited to participate in a recorded oral history interview as part of a PhD project entitled \'93Chemicals and Their Users in the British Home, 1930s to 1980s\'94 . This information sheet has been prepared to explain why the research is being done and what it will involve. You can decide whether or not to take part. If you decide to participate, you can change your mind at any time and are free to withdraw at any time, without giving a reason.
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa254

\f0\b \cf0 What is the purpose of this study?
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\f0 \cf0 Ordinary everyday life is sometimes seen as too mundane or obvious to be documented, but in this way it is forgotten. Participating in this project will help me, and any future researchers who re-examine the recording, to understand some of the context and user experiences that are not recorded elsewhere. This will contribute to a richer history of domestic practices and chemicals than can be researched simply from industrial history or promotional materials and objects, so in this way collecting oral histories will further the development of this field of research in social history.
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa254

\f0\b \cf0 Why have I been invited to participate?
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\f0 \cf0 This is a study of everyday life, so your memories and experiences of shopping for and using chemicals or chemical products in your home or garden are of interest. Your participation will provide an aspect which is often missing from histories of technology: the perspective of the ordinary user.
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa254

\f0\b \cf0 What will happen if I take part?
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\f0 \cf0 Together we will arrange a time and a place to have a conversation about your approach to stain removal, cleaning ovens or toilets, or, possibly and, weeding in the garden and the use of chemical weedkillers. The interview will be audio recorded, so that I focus on talking with you rather than writing notes and so that I can repeatedly listen to the recording. The interview will probably take around 45 minutes to 2 hours, and it could take place at your address, or we can choose somewhere else. Your memories about domestic practices will help to shape my research, I may quote or refer to your user experiences.  In lectures, it is useful to hear real people talk in their own words about their own histories, so I would like to be able to replay the recording with you in this type of situation. When presenting these extracts whether in written or audio format, they will be accompanied by contextual information.
\f1 \

\f0 I will send you the paperwork to formalise the interview, consisting of copyright information, a recording agreement and consent forms. You can read them and ask any questions that will help you confirm whether you are willing to take part in the recorded interview. We will review and sign them before the interview and after the interview, triple check that you\'92re comfortable with the paperwork. I\'92ll create a transcript from the interview, then send you a copy to check for accuracy, along with a copy of the recording for you to keep. 
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\f0\b \cf0 Will what I say in this interview be kept confidential?
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\f0 \cf0 You can decide whether you would prefer your contribution to be completely anonymous, through using an alias, or whether you would like to be identified by your name.  It may be the case that you or other people used certain chemicals for purposes that were not recommended by the manufacturer. All uses, advised or not, are important to this research.
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\f0\b \cf0 What happens to the results?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\b0 \cf0 The content of the recordings will inform my research and discussion. Excerpts from the recordings could be used as quotations within my written thesis or any other published material. Sound excerpts from the recordings, unless complete anonymity has been requested, could be played when I give papers or presentations on the work, or for a future virtual or real exhibition, depending on the quality of the recording. \
The AHRC, who has funded this research, would like the data to be made available to future researchers. The social history resource that you have helped to create will be valuable to academic researchers and for exhibition curators. This means that I will seek to deposit these recordings with a relevant institution, such as a museum (subject to their collecting policy), where they can be safely kept for the foreseeable future and made available for research.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\fs26 \cf0 The recordings, notes and transcripts that I make as part of the oral history will be retained in accordance with the University\'92s policy on Academic Integrity, which means that they will be kept securely filed for ten years after the project is completed in case anyone queries my thesis.
\f1\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa254

\f0\b \cf0 What should I do if I want to take part?
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\f0 \cf0 Please get in touch with Catherine Rushmore by telephone 020 3287 5404 or email catherine.rushmore-2012@brookes.ac.uk 
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa254

\f0\b \cf0 Who is organising and funding the research?
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\f0 \cf0 I am an Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) funded student in the department of History, Philosophy and Religion, which is part of the Faculty of Humanities and Social Science at Oxford Brookes University.
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa254

\f0\b \cf0 Who has reviewed the study?
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\f0 \cf0 The University Research Ethics Committee at Oxford Brookes University has reviewed this study.
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa254

\f0\b \cf0 Contact for further information
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa382

\f0 \cf0 If you would like any further information about this research, you can contact me, Catherine Rushmore, or my supervisor Dr Viviane Quirke\
catherine.rushmore\'962012@brookes.ac.uk\
vquirke@brookes.ac.uk
\f1 \

\f0 T 530 Oxford Brookes University Gispy Lane Oxford OX3 0BP
\f1 \
\
}