The Times (London, England), Saturday, Feb 17, 1934; pg. 15; Issue 46681. Narrow column advert with other gardening type ads09    Fisons Fertilzers for lawnsLawns are quickly spoiled by Moss, Clover and Weeds. Fisons’ of Ipswich specialize in Lawn Renovation and advise on treatment necessary without obligation. DESTROY WEEDS AND MOSS WITHFisons’ Lawn SandThe acknowledged chemical preparation for clearing turf of weeds. Grass is stimulated after weeds are destroyed. Use 4 oz to sq yd on dry day. One cwt is sufficient for Tennis Court and surround. Measured distributor sent. Price,s carriage Paide7lbs	14lbs	28 lbs	56lbs	1cwt3/-	4/6	7/6	13/-	22/6Write for free Gardening Guide and CatalogueJoseph Fison and Co, LtdSpecialists in Garden Fertilizers and Lawn Renovation IpswichFisons  was a fertilizer business founded in Thetford in 1908, it was bought by Edward Packard and Son, a front runner in the UK’s fertiliser industry, in 1919. Packard had set up the first complete acid and superphospate factory in the uk in the 1850s, dissolving bones or coprolites in sulphuric acid.  The first world war affected supplies of raw material, specifically a Uboat blockade prevented import of natural nitrate from Chile.. Times were hard for manufacturers so mergers helped to reduce the competition. They were already neighbours, on opposite sides of the River Gipping, barges could deliver the raw materials and export the finished fertiliser. Along with Fison, Prentics bros was also amalgamated in 1929 The parent company (EP) changed its name in 1929 to reflect the acquisition. 32 fertiliser companies in the region were acquired over 15 years. The company formally changed it name to the shorter Fisons Ltd in 1942. In the 1950s Fisons promoted crop spraying using helicopters. Ipswich, Immingham

Fisons maintain a research station (opened 1957, 340 staff, inc 90 graduates) and experimental farms at Levington in Suffolk and North Wyke in Devonshire

Fisons was one of the subjects of a competition commission enquiry. 

In 1937 Fisons acquired a controlling interest in Genatosan – extending its interest beyond fertilisers to include pharmaceuticals, medicines, fine and industrial chemicals, pest control products and milk powders. 

Seasonality of sales / application – encourage purchase in autumn and early winter to relieve some of the  pressure on manufacturers at the time of the spring sowings. 