{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1347\cocoasubrtf570
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12000\viewh15040\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri-340\qc

\f0\fs24 \cf0 REFERENCE LIST:\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ri-340\sa240
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720

\f1 \cf0 Avery, J. G., and R. H. Jackson. 
\i Children and Their Accidents
\i0 .  London: Edward Arnold, 1993.\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ri-340\sa240

\f0 \cf0 \
Barlow, Peppy, Tyrrell Burgess, and Edward Boyle. "Danger- Chemicals at Work." Education + Training 18 (1976): 243-45.\
\
Bondi, Cara A.M. "Applying the Precautionary Principle to Consumer Household Cleaning Product Development." Journal of Cleaner Production 19 (2011): 429-37.\
\
Bunge, M. L. "Chemical Hazards in the Household: What Every Community Health Nurse Should Know." Journal of community health nursing 2, no. 1 (1985): 31-40.\
\
Burnham, C. "Why Did the Infants and Toddlers Die? Shifts in Americans' Ideas of Responsibility for Accidents: From Blaming Mom to Engineering." Journal of Social History 29, no. 4 (1996): 817-37.\
\
Burnham, J. C. "How the Discovery of Accidental Childhood Poisoning Contributed to the Development of Environmentalism in the United States." Environmental History Review 19, no. 3 (1995): 57-81.\
\
\
Cooper, Timothy, and Sarah Bulmer. "Refuse and the \'91Risk Society\'92: The Political Ecology of Risk in Inter-War Britain." Social History of Medicine  (2012): 1-21.\
\
Craft, A.W. "Circumstances Surrounding Deaths from Accidental Poisoning 1974-80." Archives of Disease in Childhood 58 (1983): 544-46.\
\
Daemmrich, Arthur. "Risk Frameworks and Biomonitoring: Distributed Regulation of Synthetic Chemicals in Humans." Environmental History 2008, no. 4 (2013): 684-94.\
\
Diggle, Rebecca E. "Regulatory Science and Uncertainty in the Risk Assessment of Pesticide Residues." PhD, University of Nottingham, 2010.\
\
\
Fessenden-raden, Author June, Janet M. Fitchen, and Jenifer S. Heath. "Providing Risk Information in Communities: Factors Influencing What Is Heard and Accepted.\'94 Science, Technology, & Human Values 12, no. 3 (1987): 94-101.\
\
\
Fraser, Neil C. "Accidental Poisoning Deaths in British Children 1958-77." The British Medical Journal 280, no. 6231 (1980): 1595-98.\
\
Gasior Altman, Rebecca, Rachel Morello-Frosch, Julia Green Brody, Ruthann Rudel, Phil Brown, and Mara Averick. "Pollution Comes Home and Gets Personal: Women's Experience of Household Chemical Exposure." Journal of Health and Social Behaviour 49, no. 4 (2008): 417-35.\
\
Gilbert, David, and Richard Macrory. Pesticide Related Law.  Farnham: The British Crop Protection Council, 1989.\
\
Gleason, Mona. "From "Disgraceful Carelessness" to "Intelligent Precaution": Accidents and the Public Child in English Canada, 1900-1950." Journal of Family History 30, no. 2 (2005): 203-41.\
\
Goulding, Roy, G. K.  Ashforth, and H. Jenkins. "Household Products and Poisoning." The British Medical Journal 1, no. 6108 (1978): 286-87.\
\
Graham, J. D. P. "Forensic Medicine and Toxicology: Poisoning in the Home." British Medical Journal 2, no. 5545 (1967): 157-59.\
\
Grossman, Joel. "What's Hiding under the Sink: Dangers of Household Pesticides." Environmental Health Perspectives 103, no. 6 (1995): 550-54.\
\
Jackson, R.H, and A.W. Wilkinson. "Why Don't We Prevent Childhood Accidents?". British Medical Journal 1 (1976): 1258-62.\
\
Jacobziner, Harold. "Causes, Control and Prevention of Accidental Poisonings." Public Health Reports (1896-1970) 81, no. 1 (1966): 31-41.\
\
Katzman, Martin T. "Chemical Catastrophes and the Courts." Public Interest 82 (1986): 91-105.\
\
Kore, A. M., and A. Kiesche-Nesselrodt. "Toxicology of Household Cleaning Products and Disinfectants." The Veterinary clinics of North America Small animal practice 20, no. 2 (1990): 525-37.\
\
Liller, K. D., J. Craig, N. Crane, and R. J. McDermott. "Evaluation of a Poison Prevention Lesson for Kindergarten and Third Grade Students." Injury Prevention 4, no. 3 (1998): 218-21.\
\
Lowry, Stella. "Accidents at Home." British Medical Journal 300, no. 6717 (1990): 104-06.\
\
Marks, Harry M. "Making Risks Visible: The Science, Politics and Regulation of Adverse Drug Reactions." Chap. 4 In Ways of Regulating Drugs in the 19th and 20th Centuries, edited by Jean-Paul Gaudilli\'e8re and Volker Hess. Science, Technology and Medicine in Modern History, 97-120. Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2013.\
\
Martens, Lydia, and S. U. E. Scott. "Under the Kitchen Surface: Domestic Products and Conflicting Constructions of Home." Home Cultures 3, no. 1 (2006): 39-62.\
\
McIntosh, A. Fraser. "Pesticides - a Review of the Control, Safety and Forensic Interests." Medicine, Science and the Law 17, no. 4 (1977): 231-38.\
\
Minchom, P.E., J.R. Sibert, R.G. Newcombe, and M.A. Bowley. "Does Health Education Prevent Childhood Accidents?". Postgraduate Medical Journal 60 (1984): 260-62.\
\
Mohun, Arwen. Risk : Negotiating Safety in American Society.  Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013.\
\
Moore, Alfred, and Jack Stilgoe. "Experts and Anecdotes: The Role of "Anecdotal Evidence" in Public Scientific Controversies." Science, Technology, & Human Values 34, no. 5 (2009): 654-77.\
\
Pearn, J., J. Nixon, A. Ansford, and A. Corcoran. "Accidental Poisoning in Childhood : Five Year Urban Population Study with 15 Year Analysis of Fatality." British Medical Journal 288, no. 6410 (1984): 44-46.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720
\cf0 Petroski, Henry. "Engineering Painful Design." American Scientist 93, no. 2 (2005): 113-1137.\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ri-340\sa240
\cf0 \
\
Pilling, H. H. "Coroners' Jurisdiction." The British Medical Journal 3, no. 5558 (1967): 179.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720

\f1 \cf0 Poyner, Barry, and Nigel Hughes. 
\i Home and Leisure Accident Research: Personal Factors in Domestic Accidents
\i0 . Translated by Department of Trade and Industry.  London: Department of Trade and Industry, 1980.
\f0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ri-340\sa240
\cf0 \
Press, Chicago, and Biennial Meeting. "Some Public Policy Problems with the Science of Carcinogen Risk Assessment Author ( S ): Carl F . Cranor Reviewed Work ( S ): Source : Psa : Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association , Vol . 1988 , Volume Two : Symposia." 1988, no. 1988 (2012): 467-88.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720
\cf0 Reid, D. H. S. "Child-Resistant Containers." British Medical Journal 2, no. 5712 (2013): 791-92.\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ri-340\sa240
\cf0 \
Sapolsky, Harvey M. "The Politics of Risk." Daedalus 119, no. 4 (1990): 83-96.\
\
Sibert, J.R. "Accidents to Children: The Doctor's Role. Education or Environmental Change." Archives of Disease in Childhood 66 (1991): 890-93.\
\
Slovic, Paul. "Perception of Risk." Science, New Series 236, no. 4799 (1987): 280-85.\
\
Smith, Denis, and Alan Irwin. "Public Attitudes to Technological Risk: Contribution of Survey Data to Public Policy Making.\'94 Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 9, no. 4 (1984): 419-26.\
\
Tach\'e9, J., and B. Carpentier. "Hygiene in the Home Kitchen: Changes in Behaviour and Impact of Key Microbiological Hazard Control Measures." Food Control 35 (2014): 392-400.\
\
Tarr, Joel A., and Mark Tebeau. "Managing Danger in the Home Environment, 1900-1940." Journal of Social History 29, no. 4 (1996): 797-816.\
\
Towner, Elizabeth, Therese Dowswell, and Stephen Jarvis. Reducing Childhood Accidents: The Effectiveness of Health Promotion Interventions a Literature Review.  London: Health Education Authority, 1993.\
\
van Zwanenberg, Patrick, and Erik Millstone. "Beyond Skeptical Relativism: Evaluating the Social Constructions of Expert Risk Assessments." Science, Technology, & Human Values 25, no. 3 (2000): 259-82.\
\
Ward, J. C. "Toxicity Criteria Used in Judging the Labelling of Pesticides." American journal of public health and the nation's health 45, no. 6 (1955): 723-7.\
\
Warren, Christian. Brush with Death: A Social History of Lead Poisoning.  Baltimore; London: John Hopkins University Press, 2000.\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720

\f1 \cf0 \
Whyte, Rebecca. "Changing Approaches to Disinfection in England C.1848-1914." Thesis, University of Cambridge, 2012.\

\f0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\ri-340\sa240
\cf0 Whyte, Rebecca. "Preventing Accidents, Prioritising Health: Disinfectants, Disease and the Plurality of Risk." Conference: Accidents and Emergencies. Oxford Brookes University, 2013.\
}