Notes from Photographers Formulary – Montana 
	Introduced the concept of pre measured kits for popular formulas. Also has own line of processing chemistry and manufactures several rare photographic chemicals including glycin. Rayco Chemical Co – bulk chems, prepared chemistry film, paper and safety equipment – Barnsley South Yorkshire  (Only UK supplier listed in this book)   http://www.swpp.co.uk/trade/4938.htm The Darkroom Cookbook – based on series of articles from Camera & Darkroom magazine (US?  The books are US)	Browsing the chemical section at a camera store	A young woman inquired what it was used for – that sounds too technical to me – realise that one photographers basic craft is another photographers “oh my goodness”. Yet I never considered myself to be technical…. To me adding bromide or carbonate to a developer is about as technical as exposing for the shadows. Every photographer should know that.3rd edition leaves out intensifiers that use mercuric chloride, as silver nitrate intensifiers are not as toxic. “Learn methods to alter and improved published formulas. Through the use of chemicals and additives you can fine tune over the counter or published formulae. …. Even packaged formulas can be used by a chef to great advantages. Mixing soft-working warm-toned Ilford Warmtone with varying amount s o f Ilford Coldtone  paper developer will open entire new worlds in print colour and tonal scale. The manufacturers do not suggest this in their literature, but then the manufactures are not artists. They’re probably not even photographers.”  Ed3 introductionEd1 – Meritol was no longer available – when did it become unavailable?Ed1 p88 – ascorbic acid as an environmentally friendly replacement for hydroquinone in some new formulas. Some use sodium ascorbate in addition to hydroquinone. There is no env or health benefit with this approach, ascorbates are simple being used to enhance the photographic properties of conventional chemicals. Ed1p89 Photographic chemicals when handled with reasonable precautions do not, in the view of some manufacturers (such as the Paterson Group), appear to pose a material health hazard greater than many common household cleaning solutions or cosmetic products such as hair dyes. Yet there is a continual desire y educators who wish to teach black wand white processing o children for chemistry that is entirely safe. This desire is complicated by our imperfect and constantly evolving knowledge of toxicity. Phenidone and its derivatives are an example: it was thought until recently that the oral toxicity of the Phenidones was very low. Recently animal data suggest that P may be more dangerous when ingested….. Never the less ascorbates are the safest developing agents both for humans and the environment yet discovered.Ed 1 P66 – PPD and derivates are still used in contemporary hair dyes, by photographic standards of toxicity and in the photographic literature these chemicals are considered to be highly toxic. Early researchers believed ppd was less toxic in solution. We doubt contemporary toxicologist would agree.Ed 1 P28 sidebar- Potassium bisulfite or metabisulfie was occasionally used in stop baths formulated in Germany before the Second World War. This occasionally resulted in the conversion of sodium to potassium thiosulfate in the fixing bath, which led to prints which cold not be fixed completely. Customer complaints were diligently investigated by Agfa’s Dr Edith Weyde in the 1930s and led to her basic patents for diffusion transfer photography. After the war all German patents were nullified leaving Dr Edwin Land of polaroid free to make history with instant photography. P21 – Chlorhydroquine – used mostly in print developers where it can produce brown to red tones until 1960s. No commercial developers based on CQ exist today – manufacturing process is both dangerous and expensive. P129 – Safety guidelines more stringent than ever…. A recent 31 year study of photographic processors working with both &W and colour films and papers exposed to photographic chemicals full time and on a daily basis over more of their working lives shows that photographic processors have a lower mortality rate when compared either to the general population or to all hourly workers. ..”Based on available epidemiological info it does not appear that photographic processing presents an increased mortality risk, even at the higher concentrations of exposure likely to have been present in the 1950s and 1960s” Ordinary prudence… not eating them, taking reasonable precautions against exposure to the skin, respiratory system and the eyes.  P135 – when working with an chemical, ou assume responsibility for its safe use and disposal. Follow any special instructions included with each chemical or process being used. Laws concerning disposal of chemicals vary widely, contact HazMat at local fire dept. (US)See also Focal Encyclopaedia of Photography.