 John Savage
 Oral History of Community Pharmacy

Medicine counter: mainly asking for named preparation. People would come in and ask the boss to make them something for a cough, or whatever. But vast majority were just asking for named products. A bottle of Venos, liquid paraffin. Hardly ever said 'I want a painkiller - what are the options?' They wanted Aspirin, Veganin, etc. Opportunities to discuss relative merits of 1 to another were very limited. Result of advertising - highly promoted: TV advertising came later - mainly magazine advertising.  ....Sulphurethazine was a S1 poison - could be sold to someone you knew reasonably well - they would sign the poisons book. 

Abortion - you got lots of hints:. Mr Dukes told him to back off these very quickly and suggest they go to the Dr: didn't really present a great problem. Penny Royal was around: was not stocked: slippery elm bark not sold. Sold plenty of slippery elm powder; and again we sold slippery elm invalid foods: requests for powder were fairly genuine. 

966-70. Metrication - was implemented reasonably smoothly. 'It gave me - I don't know about other pharmacists - a nice point of contact with the doctors: because there were plenty of Drs who had their own little nostrums, and they wanted their nostrums converting into metric quantities: if you were very nice to them and did the conversions, you built a bridge'. Local Drs could come in - talk about impending metrication - they were unhappy about not being able to prescribe half pints any more. They wanted to know what the quantities they could prescribe looked like physically: a lot of Drs had no more idea than the man in the moon, what 200ml was: they knew what 8oz was. 200ml was a foreign thing. Other Drs you might have to phone up - what qualities they wanted dispensing: if they'd written their nostrum in apothecaries measures. JS offered to reformulate in metric, and send them a copy that really was a good opportunity for pharmacists. Made a lot of contacts and built bridges in tat way. Use of Latin - had been dying for quite a while - did have the odd pedantic Dr who even worried about his Latin directions being grammatically correct: Dr reprimanded JS for not correcting his grammar! Latin tags might just as well have been in morse code: tds, qid, were purely a code - fact that they were based in Latin was neither here nor there. The Drs who were capable of writing a prescription with a proper Latin direction were dying off at an alarming rate. Use of proper names - mixture, tablets, 'as before'. When NP convention came in, you could split the Drs into 2 camps: the older ones didn't like it and didn't want it: the younger ones were all in favour and saw the advantages: identification, and ability to write a repeat prescription when faced with something that a partner had prescribed: some Drs records were a little bit deficient. Drs who objected to open declaration of what it was were the ones who were still practising a little bit of magic - and wanted some mystique to surround what they had prescribed. Labelling it 'the mixture' was part of the mystique. Generally speaking, patients welcomed it, but would still say - can I have some of Dr Crossley's mixture - purple mixture for upset stomachs - told in new labelled - patient says 'I can't remember all that lot'. Especially mist. carb aromat. tinct. card co.

