Feminism confronts technology Judy WajcmanCh4 Domestic Technology: Labour-saving or Enslaving? (p.81 -109)p.81housework studied since 1970s – see Oakley and Joan Vanek’s Time Spent in Housework (US – are there UK ones?) – maybe I could look at how these types of studies were picked up in popular press, or by industry as a reference point to develop or market products?Mechanisation of housework – can chemical dispensers be counted as mechanisation? p.83Questions from Wajcman – rship between tech developments in the economy and those in the home? To what extent did new technoliges industrialise the home and transform domestic labour? Why despite chnages uch as running water, gas and elec cookes, central heating, washing machines refrig do studies show that household work still accounts for half total working time?  Sirageldin 1969 – “History of housework is the story of its elimination”Cowan – mechanisationi – whole range of new tasks which were less physically demanding but still time consuming. p.85 remodelled ideology of housewifery. Domestic science movement, germ theory, scientific motherhood led to exacting standards of housework and childcare. Rising standards of personald and household cleanliness. Washing machines increased expectations of cleanliness.   See Arnold and Burr 1985 

Chemicals for cleaning/ housework and their delivery technologies are not mentioned. The exception is Francis Gabe’s self cleaning home, where detergent and water are misted over the rooms, and degreasant is squirted from the bathtub to clean itself. Decisions about what chemicals are appropriate for this and they would still need loading/ refilling / obtaining. 

Not much on hobbies, other than men can watch TV without the guilt of thinking they should be doing something else. Horticulture was described as women’s work - assume this is because it is nuturing and productive. Again, chemicals were not described. 
