Joel TarrCity – hinterland relationship : consumption of basic necessities, wast disposal, consumption of land. Life cycle analysis (what and when did people know about products effeects on the environment, what they did afterwards) Industrial ecology  - actual impact of consumption on the env over time  (does this ignore production?) Social and cult histUS centric article on agriculture and chemistry: Urban fertilisers: organic wastes, slaughterhouse waste: hair flesh scrapings, spent tan bark from tanneries, spent bone charcoal from sugar fefineries, distillery refuse, the waste of glue factories, cottonseed, street sweepings, bones, sawdust, lime from paper mills, waste from soap boilers an dfish markets. Logical substitutes for already popular ferilisers byt many did not success beceasue they weren’t chemically equivalent, quantities were not enough or reliable. Nitrogen fixing after war – needed market for product. Articifial fertilisers were advocated by municipal and state authorieis. Reduced soil fertility due to thedimished organic content of the soil, deteriorated soil structure, increased soil erosion.1930s catastrophic erosion – Dust Bowl USA  CE Kellogg “We Seek, We Learn” in Soil Yearbook of Agriculture, 19571940s agriculture beginning to blance chemistry with biology, technology with ecoogy. Soil conservationists were understanding the complex natyre of living soil. 1938 book Yearbook of Agriculture, Soils and Men, is an example of the shift to wards an ecologically sound agriculture. USDA1950s shift back to predominantly chem. And tech. Also the emotional controversy between organic and chemical agriculture reached its peak. Negative impact on academic sustainable ag research. ???Did the same swings happen in UK? 