Booklet produced by government body, accessed at BL (offsite, order in advance)
Chemicals for the gardener
two editions, some uproar after publication of the first as it recommended many DDT products when there was growing awareness of potential harm and restraint.


1963 – Don’t let garden pests, disease and weeds get the better of you!Many of the pest and diseases that spoil fruit flowers, vegetables and shrubs can be controlled and the back-breaking and time consuming job of weeding can be lessened reduced by the use of right kind of chemicals at the right time.Farmers have been quick to recognise how chemicals can help them in their drive for bigger and healthier crops, and now amateur gardeners can follow in their footsteps. Many of the chemicals that famers use are available in small packs especially for garden use. All these preparations have been considered for possible dangers to humans, domestic animals and wildlife before being approved for use. So far as is known, none of the garden packs when used according to the direction sis likely to be harmful to birds or other wildlife in the garden. Seed dressing containing aldrin, dieldrin or heptachlor which can be harmful to birds are not available as approved garden products. These chemicals are many and varied and the same chemicals are often sold under different trade names so that the gardener needs some assistance in his search for the right one! This booklet attempts to show which chemicals can be used in the garden both safely and to the best effect. 1965 - Many of the pest and diseases that spoil fruit, flowers and vegetables can be controlled and the job of weeding can be lessened by the use of chemicals. Farmers have used chemicals for some time in their drive for bigger and healthier crops, and in recent years many products containing these chemicals have come onto the market in small packs for use by gardeners. Misuse of chemicals may, however, cause harm to people, domestic animals and wild life and they must be used with care and discrimination. The chemicals are made up in a number of preparations and sold for specific purposes under a variety of trade names. To confine the effect of chemicals as far as possible to the pests, disease or weeds to be controlled gardeners require advice on the correct choice and method of application. This booklet attempts to meet this need. All the products in this book have been officially approved as efficient for the purposes claimed and the chemicals contain in them (with the exception of a few compounds which have been in general use for many years) have also been considered by the Govt Advisory Committee on Pesticides and other Toxic Chemicals for their possible harmful effects to humans, farm and domestic animals and wild life. In a recent report to the MAFF the advisory committee noted that the continuing use of persistent chemicals could contribute to the contamination of living things and their environment and recommended that less persistent chemicals should be used wherever possible in preference to persistent ones. BHC and DDT are persisted chemical and gardeners are urged to use them with restraint. Provided the products named in this booklet are used for the purposes listed on their labels, and instruction for use carefully followed, no harm should arise from their use in gardens. . 1963 – six pointsTreat all chemicals with careKeep chemicals and used containers out of reach of children and pets. Some chems although not harmful to humans may be to pets or fish e.g. derris is poisonous to fish and should not be used near fish tanks and ponds.Read directions carefully. Always use the recommended amount and never add a bit more for luck. Be careful to note the time intervals given between last treatment and picking, as this will make certain that no harmful deposits remain when the fruit or veg are gathered. Do not spray chem. For controlling pest on plants being visited by bees at flowering time. Many of these chems are poisonous to bees and it is important not to kill these useful pollinating insectsWash out watering cans and sprayers thoroughly when treatment is finished. Traces of weed control chemical in particular may remain and cause damage to plants treated later. It is best to keep a separate watering can for weed control chemic but if this is not possible wash out thoroughly with detergent and follow with several rinses of clean water. Metal can are generally easier to clean out completely than plastic cans. Wash hands thoroughly when the job is finished. 1965 seven points. Handle all chemicals with care. Only use them when really necessary. Do not use persistent chemicals if short lived ones will do the job.Same, same, same, sameDo not spray or dust in windy weather. Spray or dust may be carried needlessly onto plants other than those requiring treatment; weedkillers can cuase damage to valuable plants. Same, same Helping You to Choose ChemicalsMore than one chem. Can be used for the same purpose and the preceding pages have covered some of the factor that help in choosing the right chem.. There remains the question – which of the proprietary brands of chem. On the market to chose> The Ministry of Agriculture helps to answer this question for you! The makers of chemical of both farm and garden use can submit their products for approval under the Ministry sponsored Agricultural Chemicals  Approval Scheme if you buy only officially approved products you can be certain that the material used in them are of the right kind and in the correct amount for the job they have to do. The labels of the products will have been checked to make sure that the claims made are faire and reasonable. Equally important the products must be recognised by the ministry to be safe to use as instructed don the label. ……When buying garden chemicals for pest, disease or wed control insist on approved products. Make sure they have an ‘A’ mark on the label like that on the cover of this booklet. Remember too that the label as well as the product has been approved. Read it carefully before using any chemical. Ant Doom (shell) aldrinBoots Ant destroyer Boots BHC Dust Gamma BHC dust (Murphy) Lindex Garden Spray (Murphy) Sybol (Plant Protection )DDT with BHC Flay (May and Baker) DDT with BHC and pyrethrumShell universal petroleum DNC winterwashAgrisol tar oil winter wash (solignum) Bugges standard tar oil winter washCarbo Craven Para Carbo (craven) tar oil with petroleum oilFisons Kil, Fisons Kil aerosol Copper – coppicide by Shell  to treat leaf mould on tomatoCopper – Bouisol by Boots, or Bordeaux mixture by May and Baker, Coppidide by Shell Murphy Bordeaux powder to treat leaf spots on black currant, celery Copper – PBI Cheshunt Compound (Pan Britannica) for treating damping off of seedlings. Lime sulpher – Bugges eclipse lime sulpher, crave ls , Murphy ls PBI ls spring wash (pan Britannica)Sulpher – spersul (plant proetion all to treat powdery mildews. Calomel  Berks 4% calomel dust, boots calomel dust, cyclosan by May and Baker, ITP 4%calomel dust (International toxin products) PBI calomel dust (Pan Britannica)Amcide (Albright & Wilson) ammonium sulphonamide  - controlof annul and perennia broad leaved weeds Berk MTS mercurised turf tmt – caomel w iron sulphatw Fisons lawn sand based on lawn sand (no obv/named chem.) Bugges Microsulf – sulphur treat powdery mildew