{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf190
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 AvenirNext-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\info
{\title EthicsInfoSheet}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\vieww16560\viewh9780\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\f0\b\fs26 \cf0 draft information sheet
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl700\sa240

\b\fs70 \cf0 Chemicals and their Users in the British Home 1930 to 1989\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\b0\fs26 \cf0 You are invited to participate in an oral history interview as part of a PhD project entitled \'93Chemicals and their Users in the British Home\'94 . This information sheet has been prepared to explain why the research is being done and what it will involve. You can decide whether or not to take part. If you decide to take part, if you change your mind at any time, you are free to withdraw at any time and without giving a reason.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa240

\b\fs58 \cf0 What is the purpose of this study?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\b0\fs26 \cf0 Ordinary everyday life is sometimes seen as too mundane or obvious to be documented. Participating in this project will help me to understand some of the context and user experiences that are not recorded elsewhere. This will contribute to a richer history of domestic chemicals than can be researched simply from industry archives or promotional materials.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa240

\b\fs58 \cf0 Why have I been invited to participate?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\b0\fs26 \cf0 This is a study of everyday life, so your memories and experiences of shopping for and using chemicals or chemical products in your home or garden are of interest. Your participation will provide an aspect which is often missing from histories of technology: the perspective of the user. I aim to collect at least 15 recordings of discussions or interviews with people who have lived in Britain and used (or not used) chemicals in their home or garden.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa240

\b\fs58 \cf0 What will happen if I take part?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\b0\fs26 \cf0 Together we will arrange a time and a place that is suitable for audio recording your interview.  This could be at your home, or at a quiet public space. I will ask you to share memories and thoughts about household tasks and hobbies involving chemicals (or perhaps deciding against using certain chemicals), talking more generally about the time period in question. The aim of this historical is to find out how you dealt with these questions as they arose and how they shaped your subsequent actions, rather than to provide information about the scientific effects of a diverse set of chemicals. Depending on how much you want to say, it could take around an hour or perhaps two hours. After the interview you will be sent a copy of the recording and the transcript that I made from the recording. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa240

\b\fs58 \cf0 Will what I say in this interview be kept confidential?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\b0\fs26 \cf0 The content of the recordings will inform my research and discussion, so I would like to be able to use what you say an historical record. You can decide whether you would prefer your contribution to be anonymous, through using a respondent number or an alias, or whether you would like to be identified by name. If you disclose illegal activities, there are legal limits to the level of confidentiality that I can keep. The small number of interviews means that if your contribution was anonymised,  someone could identify you from a particularly unusual or unique activity revealed in your interview. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa240

\b\fs58 \cf0 What happens to the results?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\b0\fs26 \cf0 Excerpts from the recordings could be used as quotations within my written thesis or any other published material. Sound excerpts from the recordings, unless complete anonymity has been requested, could be played when I give papers or presentations on the work, or for a future virtual or real exhibition, depending on the quality of the recording. The recordings, notes and transcripts that I make as part of the oral history will be retained in accordance with the University\'92s policy on Academic Integrity, which means that they will be kept securely filed for ten years after the project is completed in case anyone queries my thesis.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa240

\b\fs58 \cf0 What should I do if I want to take part?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\b0\fs26 \cf0 Please leave details of how I can contact you to arrange an interview.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa240

\b\fs58 \cf0 Who is organising and funding the research?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\b0\fs26 \cf0 I am an Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) funded student in the department of History, Faculty of Humanities and Social Science at Oxford Brookes University.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa240

\b\fs58 \cf0 Who has reviewed the study?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\b0\fs26 \cf0 This study has been reviewed and approved by The University Research Ethics Committee at Oxford Brookes University.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560\sa240

\b\fs58 \cf0 Contact for further information\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa380

\b0\fs26 \cf0 If you would like any further information about this research, you can contact me, Catherine Rushmore, or my supervisor Dr Viviane Quirke\
T 530 Oxford Brookes University Gispy Lane Oxford OX3 0BP\
catherine.rushmore\'962012@brookes.ac.uk\
vquirke@brookes.ac.uk\
}