The feat of invisible chemicals being taken in through food and drink were not present in Britatin in the way they were in America. ??John Sheail: An envinronmental history of twentieth century britatin	Government viewWhat is Paris green? Who used it to kill pests?   Lead arsenate, emerald-green 	Lutts ‘Chemical Fallout pp211-213Carson herself  wasn’t associated with the fringe groups, she wanted nothing to do with the but they did embrace her book. People were not suddenly radiacalised by reading Silent Sring – already concern, actively involved or supporting conservation groups. 	Industrial pollution, air quality and water cleanlinessEnvironmentalists often criticised as seeking to defend the interst of the privileged and being made up of a privileged class  -  see Rome, give early a chanceSmog – not invisible, could see threat and associate it with the problems it caused. Regional crisis, affecting London. Nature conservancy – March 1949. Independent advisory group, the 4th research council. Shortlived. Max Nicholson – see ODNB “ornithologist snad environmentalist’ British conruntryside was the product of nature and humans, and that is surival depended in many instances on humans continuing to shapet it. A history of contemporary ecology. Stephen Bocking.	NC – Toxic Chemicals and Wildlife division TCWE	RSPB also set up a committee investigating effects of pesticides on birds. 		1961 – pesticides covered seeds before spring planting		1962 ban on spring seed dressing. May be no need for bottom up response if govt were handling situation well.  (Mark’s words)Kenneth Mellanby	Compare sales / impac to Carson? 		Carson brought debate about unregulated use of chemical into the puclic sphere. (Mellanby)Blueprint for surival Small is Beautiful\	Mark suggests that these books had more impact than SS, but does not sya how he came to this conclusion. The Conservation Society (different to the nature conservancy) est 1966 as a result of pos-war affluence  helpted to set an environmental agenda	Veldman, Fantasy, the bomb and the greening of britain