Popular literatureRacehel Carson, Silent Springhttp://reason.com/archives/2012/09/26/silent-spring-turns-50-this-weekNotes from Frank Graham : Since Silent Spring.p53 Carson addressed the Women’s National Book Associationp71 inevitably she was made uncomfortable by those[unnamed]  semi-mystical groups which detect a murderous intent behind any use of modern chemicals. P71 Carson spoke to the Women’s National Press Club dinnerP73 Sylvia Proter reportd that dozens of “safe insecticides” were hastily concocted by gyp artists in the wake of SS. Miracle products, phoney epxerts and ultrasonic rodent control devices proliferated. Increase in use of old fashioned byt ligeitimate botanical pesticides pyrethrm and rotenoneP81-2 Afer pubn of SS in 1963 the ussue of toxid chemicals was debated in the House of Lords. Rachel Carson or her book were mentioned 23 times during the proceedings. “I well remember watching from the public gallery the debate in the House of Lords and seeing two red spots below – the dust jackets of the English edition of Silent Spring beside the dispatch box on either sid – one for reference by the Government spokesman Lord Hailsham, the other by the opposistion spokes man Lord shackleton.” Peter Scott. P83 citiens promted scientific and parliamenty investigatins. Oesticides had been unr suspicioun in England in 1957 the Pestcides Saftey Precautions scehme was negotiated between govt depts. And trade associations. No introduction of new pesticides or advocate new uses for existing ones until approved by committee of sicnetists. p85 On SS – despite saying that a 1962 voluntary agreement re chlorinated hydrocarbons as cereal seed dressings (as a response to an acute effect), he seems to attribute the ‘close attention to the dispersal of its pesticides’ to the publication of SS, when it could be argued that UK would anyway. Chemical industry, through the Association of British Manufacturers of Agricultuarl Chemicals moved to have the voluntary scheme of submitting each new chemical to the govt scientific subcommittee (chem., phys properties, toxicity data) mandatory. P86 “We would like the scheme to be made manadatory because it would relieve us of responsibility. On Chemicals for Gardeners recommending a deluge of pesticides for every minor annoyance that a home gardener is likely to encounter. Every insect, every unewanted weed or grass, has its deadly anitidote here and sometimes two or three. “I find it a rather frightening comilation”Dr Kenneth Mellanby, director of Monks Wood Expt Station. P118 Hawks morally rehabilitated in 1950s as the mice and rodents they eat were discovered to be enemy number one for farmers. P119 birds paralysed by feeding on thallium poisoned miceP121 increased motor traffice, hedgerow estruction, overhead wires, reduction in numbers and variety of weed palnts and their insect fauna. Population decline of the peregrine is most marked in areas where pesticide use has been heavy. Decline began about  1956 exactly coinciding with the abrupt rise in the use of persistent pesticides. P123 Britain now receives a substantioal amount of DDT in its rainfall (from US)P139 (US use) parathion – illegal in NYcuty w/o permit but in Maimi and uburbs peddlers go from door to dor selling parathion in unmarked paper bags. P150 It would be foolish to brand chemical pesticides as a major cause of cancer and birth defect. But it would be foolhardy to suggest that we already know the full cost to our health that we must pay for their unrestricted use in the enviromet. P195 – sodium fluroacetate Compound 1080 a rodenticide. P268 – 1969 lindane was banned in many home vaporizors. Home Garden Magazine (US?) refused to accept ads for DDT and other chlorinated hydrocarbons. Magazine urged readers not to use persistent pesticides. Homeoneer took to nonchemical pest killers such as black light dveices luring insects to drowning, pulverization or electrocution. Chlorinated hydrocarbons: DDT aldrin, dieldrin, endrin, chlordane, heptachlor and toxaphene. less persistent organic phosphates (e.g. parathion, malathion) and the carbamates (e.g. carbaryl)UShttp://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2012/09/rachel-carsons-natural-histories.html  - established writer of natural histories which were not polemic, credible. Henry Dalton Clifford Lovell, P. L. 1958. Halving Your Housework: A Practical Guide for Women Who Hate Doing It. London: Mills & Boon. How to run your home without help 1949Katharine WhitehornGood HousekeepingPortrait of a Daily Help – Margaret NortonHousewife (mag, 50s -60s)Palmer, P. 1989. Domesticity and Dirt: Housewives and Domestic Servants in the United States, 1920–1945. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press. Rutherford, J. W. 2003. : Christine Frederick and the Rise of Household Efficiency. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press.Simpson, H. 1934. The Happy Housewife: A Book for the House that Is or Is To Be. London: Hodder & Stoughton.Wylde, M. 1937. A Housewife in Kensington. London: Longmans, Green & Co. 