{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1347\cocoasubrtf570
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sb240\sa120\qc

\f0\b\fs56 \cf0 Photographic Chemicals\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Working in a science museum and caring for a photography collection alerted me to a number of questions about photographic chemicals, because they were often perceived as problematic by widows and children clearing out a deceased amateur photographer's belongings. Were these chemicals still useful to anyone? Were they poisonous? Would the museum collect them? What should they do with them? Sometimes the bottles and boxes stamped with shop addresses provided traces of where the photographer had been to get his supplies, which could be contrasted to the much more distant and dispersed suppliers in these days of online shopping that modern home developers had to source their chemical supplies from. These two strands of common enquiries to curators of photography collections framed my approach to this chapter. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\sb240\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 	
\b\fs36 Why am I looking at this?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Although the analysis of amateur photographs and albums has provided much meat for discussion of family life and the domestic environment as well as the role of photographs in them, surprisingly little has been written about the pursuit of photography and home darkrooms, as the literature review showed. There are many facets of social history, histories of science and technologies, that could be explored through studying domestic darkrooms. This chapter is not the place to attempt to cover everything related to this practice, but developing photographs is an interesting scenario to examine when considering users of chemicals in the home.  \
The development of ones own photographs, instead of sending them to a mass production outfit, has generally been considered 'technical' photography, which as it was practiced by men and thought unappealing to women, became a gendered activity. The decline in developing photographs at home has been attributed to increasing difficulty in obtaining chemicals (has it? Reference? Or clarify that it has been colloquially, in passing, off hand attributed to this cause), so this chapter will explore the chemicals used, whether they did become harder to get and the reasons this may have been the case. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\sb240\sa120
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 	
\b\fs36 Why does this matter?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Although operating a home darkroom can be considered a hobby that few people pursued, restricted to those who had the financial means and the physical space, not to mention the will to apply themselves to an experimental activity, this pastime brought chemicals into the home. They could be used for their developing capabilities, but also could be put to other uses in the domestic environment. The presence of some of these chemicals could also constitute a threat to health, whether human, animal or environmental, if they were mishandled, or misused. Having a better understanding of the ways that these chemicals were used legitimately for hobbies and general household purposes (where applicable) adds detail to the picture that this thesis is building up of the different users of chemicals in the British home. In doing so, the apparent restriction, withdrawal or concealment of chemicals for this purpose can be viewed and compared to other chemicals that were also available for other domestic purposes. Was there anything different about these chemicals, or about their users, that led to the perception that these chemicals became harder to get?\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\sb240\sa120
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 	
\b\fs36 What resources will be used to investigate this?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Similarly to the methods used for other chapters, specialist magazines such as 
\i The Amateur Photographer
\i0 , instructional books as well as references to photographic chemicals found in newspapers and government discussions will form the basis of the content, supplemented by user memories obtained through oral history recordings. \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 Dave Kenyon has written about the consistency of content in weekly magazine 
\i The Amateur Photographer
\i0  when he sampled 1930s and 1990s copies. He classified the feature articles as consumer information, photographic techniques, individuals' working methods and their results, making money from photography, which in addition to a large proportion of advertising, made consumption a principle feature of the magazine. Kenyon identified photography as part of the 1930s wave of consumerism for the lower middle classes, and justified the consumer focus of the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://451DE8A6-B739-4A6D-A395-CCE97A266044"}}{\fldrslt magazine.}} \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140
\cf0 In addition to the documentary sources used in other chapters, I will also draw upon museum collections, including those of Science Museum Group (SMG) northern members, the National Media Museum (NMeM) in Bradford, the Museum of Science and Industry (MOSI) in Manchester and a National Trust Property in Liverpool known as The Hardman's House. The Hardman's House which belonged to a married couple, Chambre and Margaret Hardman who as professional photographers ran a portrait studio there and made it their home. The property is described as a 1950s time capsule, so only items that were in the house are present, and no active addition has taken place although the collection may have been managed through disposal. In this house, photography and photographic processing was an activity pursued by both, so the idea that it was a sharply demarcated gendered activity is immediately challenged. The distinction between professional premises and domestic home is of particular interest in the context of this thesis.\
NMeM has been part of the SMG since its inception, and MOSI was merged into the group in 2011.  As a national museum, NMeM collected items with national significance or provenance, whereas MOSI focused on items that were made or had compelling use stories in the Greater Manchester area and where appropriate, referred offers of object donations to NMeM. Kodak products are particularly well represented at NMeM, as the company's donated its whole collection in order to prevent it being dispersed and many of these objects feature in the Kodak gallery. MOSI's Collected Cameras exhibition was dismantled in 2012, and displayed similar objects to the Kodak gallery. Both museum's featured items used by amateurs as well as professional photographers, and for this reason the museum collections are relevant to this thesis. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\sb240\sa120
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 	
\b\fs36 Which chemicals are we talking about?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Photographic chemicals, particularly cyanide of potassium, worried a former president of the British Pharmaceutical Society E.T. Neathercoat so much that he urged photographers to 'let your local chemist deal with all dangerous photographic solutions'. \
Flash powder = \
hypo = \
cyanide \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\sb240\sa120
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 			\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 Photographic Chemicals and how to make them.\
W. TAYLOR, (Photographer)\
London : Iliffe & Sons, [1904]\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140
\cf0 \
}