{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1347\cocoasubrtf570
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\sb240\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Where were photographic chemicals available?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Chemists and photographic dealers were where these chemicals could be purchased. 
\i Could they also be mail order?
\i0  These chemicals, at least in the purities specified and required for satisfactory results, were only available from specialist retailers, they were not on offer at more general stores such as grocers, ironmongers or supermarkets. \
Photographic dealers were encouraged to cultivate rapport with their customers. Ilford published a course in salesmanship, and emphasised knowing about the customers in order to best help them, as well as to encourage sales and repeat custom. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140

\i \cf0 What about Woolworths? Perhaps this is where kits come in \'96 don't need specialist sales advice or handling/ storage? Packaging total substitute for sales people who would have previously given advice, packaged, assured quality. 
\i0 Photographic chemicals were also heavily branded from early on in the history of photography. Shearcroft urged his audience of 'practical chemists' to "BUY NOTHING BUT BRANDED {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://262F9578-CF79-4651-AECA-0609CD498615"}}{\fldrslt CHEMICALS".}} The emphasis in instruction manuals, such as Shearcroft's, on purity and thus on branded products, was directed so that the user could be sure they got what they needed and avoided disappointment with poor quality, but perhaps more readily available, substitutes. He gave the example of sodium carbonate, commonly known as washing soda, but strictly separated the menial tasks of washing up and cleaning floors for which a low grade chemical was good enough, from the skilled technical use of developing photographs, which necessitated a finer grade for satisfactory results. His book carried no warning about securing the photographic grade from being used for household tasks, suggesting that he did not consider this a likely scenario and the household photographer's supplies would be safe from anyone seeking a quantity suitable for cleaning. \
The Hardmans glass fronted chemical cabinets display rows of partially used up bottles from photographic chemical specialists Johnsons of Hendon and Kodak, local chemists such as Clay & Abraham on nearby Bold St (where they purchased many of the lotions and medications stored in their medicine cabinets) as well as chemical companies who did not specialise in photographic supplies, such as A. Gallenkamp & Company.\
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\sb240\sa120
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 \
}