Notes on Unilever1930 Unilever was formed from merger – avoid competing for same raw materials. 1930 – Persil Washes Whiter ad campaign in Britain. “Washing got clothes clean, Watching gets them cleaner. Don’t wash the clothes your self… Watch persil wash them better” “Persil whitens gently as Rubbing never would” “Women find watching Persil beats hard work // for whiteness/ for quicknews/ for gentleness” Bubbles of oxygen do te work. Bring your washing problems to the Persil Insittues. During WW2 sales of Unilevers traditional procudts soap and edible fats eld up remarkabley well but brand names disappeared behind the drab covers… and almost all advance towards new products came to a halt. Unilever probided emergency wasing service in Londodn during the blitz – Free hot shower baths towels and soap hotwater. Truck branded Lifebuoy (soap)Packaging is a service that manufacturers sell to consumers. Opportunity to advertise, inform, display, make storage and dispensing easier. Self service shopping would not be possible without packaging. Soap and margarine factories had printing works, some in Bavaria even had paper mills, which Unilever inherited from the Margarine union. Thames Board Mills was taken over in 1964 by Unilever. Chemical industry since 1945 has widened the number of materials and composites available to  package consumer goods. Glass, metal foild, paper, platic films, rigid plastics, combinations of papers, boards, metals glass. Unilever involved in 60s-70s chemical industry – fatty acids, glucerine, vitamins, perfumery adhesives. Chemical interests related to the tradidional activiites o fte business, esp tose based on oils and fats. Aimed at industrial customers. http://ftvdb.bfi.org.uk/sift/title/10233 Unilever Persil Institute film