British Cinema Advertising 1945-65: An example of managerial conservatism?Mark Gardner, Institute of Historical Researchmarkgardner@dsl.pipex.comSupervisors: Professor Pat Thane and Professor Youssef CassisThe selling power of British screen advertising during 1945-65 has been misunderstood. A report discovered during archival research details the first large scale attempt to accurately assess the selling power of a film campaign in terms of over the counter sales. The report lends support to the argument that British cinema advertising was underutilised as an advertising medium during the 1950s. Nevett and Kelly have identified the cost of production, audience resentment, poor quality and the attitudes of cinema exhibitors as key factors which worked against cinema advertising. However a variety of studies undertaken by the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency, and its subsidiary, the British Market Research Bureau, undermine the validity of all but one of these assertions. The failure of industry and advertising agencies to invest in a new, and highly effective form of advertising, may offer fresh insights into managerial conservatism in Britain during the 1950s. 	British cinema advertising has been a neglected area of study. This is perhaps because cinema advertising failed to gather any real momentum. Cinema as an advertising medium experienced a continual decline in the percentage of total advertising expenditure which it secured, falling from a peak of four per cent in 1948 to one per cent in 1960.  	This pattern of declining cinema expenditure appears to be at odds with the appeal of cinema as a form of entertainment. Board of Trade statistics demonstrate the huge popularity which British cinema enjoyed during the two decades following the Second World War. In 1948, 4,708 cinemas were open at the end of the year, and a total of 1,585 million admissions were recorded.  Although cinema admissions dwindled after 1948, a figure of 343 million admissions was reported in 1964. 	The existing literature relating to British cinema advertising in the post-war period is both limited, and unable to explain why the popularity of cinema failed to translate into a source of advertising revenue. Kelly  is one of the few authors to have examined this topic. He depicts an attitude of antipathy towards advertising on the screen:   another audience grievance concerns advertisement films. A great many of        these are inept and cheap-jack snippets of poor quality which a national      television contractor would be ashamed to transmit but which exhibitors force     on their scoffing patrons.   Unfortunately, exhibitors declare that without advertisement film revenue would     be significantly lower and seat prices would have to go up. If they are a    necessary evil in most cinemas, then exhibitors should nag those who make    them into a higher degree of professional accomplishment. This would remove    a lot of audience resentment, not to mention improve the selling message of    the advertisements. Nevett has suggested that the attitude of cinema exhibitors worked against cinema advertising:   In December 1938 the Associated Picture Corporation announced that in future    no advertising films were to be shown in any of its 500 or so cinemas. John    Maxwell Chairman and Managing Director of the Corporation declared “I think it    is unethical to take money from customers at the box office then, when they are    inside, sell them products from the screen. People come to be entertained not    to be advertised at. The general public I am sure do not approve”. The issue of quality, technical expertise and cost of production are also highlighted by Nevett as having been obstacles to the growth of cinema advertising:      cinema proprietors originally objected to the showing of obvious       advertisements, which were therefore generally incorporated into short films    what was known as the “powder in jam” method of advertising. Apart from    being expensive in terms of production this approach often provoked an    adverse reaction because of poor technical quality and the general lack of    expertise. During the week ending 7th August 1943, a survey was carried out on the reaction of cinema audiences to the Lux Toilet Soap film. This was designed to convey the Lux Toilet Soap copy story in a two minute film.  On leaving the cinema 122 women were questioned about the film. The interviews were obtained from 15 different cinemas.  Their responses formed the basis of a report  prepared for Lever Brothers, by the British Market Research Bureau. 92% of those who remembered seeing an advertising film recorded a favourable response, and 86% indicated that they would like to see more films of this type.  The reasons given for wanting to see more advertising films like Lux Toilet Soap fall into three main categories. 47% thought it “amusing-interesting-unusual”, 35% thought it “instructive-helpful”, and 21% cited “other reasons”.  Although the sample size and geographical diversity of the survey are incommodious, the  findings of the report draw into question the reliability of Kelly and Nevett’s analysis regarding responses to cinema advertising.	It is apparent from client correspondence and internal memoranda that during the 1950s J. Walter Thompson was increasingly cognizant of the limitations associated with advertising in feature films. A letter written by an employee of the J. Walter Thompson film department outlines these reservations:   It stands to reason that no exhibitor will pay 30% or 40% of his box-office    receipts to the renter for a sponsored film. I have seen one such film made of    the “Good Quads”-it was a three real British quota picture in which this agency    was asked to find 2 or 3 sponsors at £3,000 each. There were no takers at this    price. When the film was completed, we were asked to the pre-view to see    what we had missed. Miss Jones and myself knew this was sponsored, but we    had great difficulty in spotting the products. We spotted British Railways-    Butlins Camps, but had to ask the producer who the remainder were. When the    film was exhibited, the final list of cinemas bore no relation to the original. These concerns contributed to the transition away from advertising in feature films, to the production in Technicolor of higher quality short advertising films. A memorandum on testing a two minute Lux Toilet Soap film  outlined the rationale for the shift:   During the past two or three years, the restrictions which existed on the amount    of hard selling one could do in a two minute film have for various reasons,     largely disappeared. The two-minute film has always been regarded by us to    possess a considerable number of attributes. It can be in Technicolor, it gives    one sufficient time to tell the full story in a visual cinematic way, it is a solus    position not flanked by other advertisers very often in the same product field as    is possible in other types of advertising films, and it has entree to the large    G.B./ Odeon circuits which also other advertising films do not possess. 	It is simplistic to suggest that the cost of cinema advertising acted as an impediment to its adoption on a broader scale. Both forms of film advertising were able to accommodate a diversity of advertising budgets. The options offered to clients who preferred advertising in a feature film, ranged from “the smallest contribution is just a shot of one of your products not in use- in other words on a shelf, in a shop window”  costing £250 to “the maximum contribution,..is the building up of a scene showing the need for your product, a shot of it in use, together with a verbal reference to the name in the dialogue” billed at £5,000.  The cost of a two minute colour film was significantly higher than the cost of insertions in a feature film, however this reflected its superior quality and efficacy. The cost per 1,000 viewers of 6 insertions per year in the film Signs of the Times was 12/6d.  The production of a two minute Film (Colour) cost £1.1s.3d. per thousand viewers.  In addition to two minute Films, filmlets (22 feet-Colour) were available at a cost of 3/8d. per 1,000 viewers  and Youngers Shoppers Gazette  at a cost ranging from 2/- to 5/- per thousand viewers, depending on length. In 1953 a report titled “The Selling Power of Screen Advertising”  was published by the London Press Exchange for Theatre Publicity. The publication was itself based on a report by the British Market Research Bureau. The report gives a detailed account of a test carried out during the winter of 1951 and the spring of 1952 to assess the effects of using advertisement films as a medium for one product. Unfortunately the product is not identified in the report and is only referred to as “Product X”.  	During 1951 the British Market Research Bureau, developed and put into practice a sales-trading mechanism in the Greater London area. The test mechanism was implemented in two areas, one in North London and one in South London; each area containing approximately 2,000,000 people (500,000 families). The two regions together incorporated nearly half the total population of Grater London.How the cinema advertising changed the position.	The 20-week base period came to an end on December 1st 1951. Immediately after this the test period began with the showing of the first film in South London, and continued until the second half of April 1952. By this time all six films had been shown at cinemas throughout the South London test area. The test period ended on 19th April 1952.Table 1.  : Index of Brand X’s sales per week during the test period.	North London (No Advertising Film)	South London Advertising FilmBase Period (20 weeks to Dec 1. 1951)	100	100Test Period:		                    4 Weeks to 29 Dec. 1951	119	140                    4 Weeks to 26 Jan.  1952 	132	160                    4 Weeks to 23  Feb  1952	125	163                    4 Weeks to 22  Mar. 1952	132	179                    4 Weeks to 19  Apr.  1952   	  83	136Average for 20 Weeks to 19 Apr. 1952	118	156 	Two key points emerge from the figures in Table 1. Whereas in the North London control area (no films) Product X’s seasonal rise during the last period was slightly less than for the total market in this area, in the South London test area its rise was more than double that for the total market. Not merely did the product gain in the film test area relatively to the control area, but the gain was cumulative throughout the period of the test. The second of these points can be seen in the following table, which gives the tonnage gains in sales of the product in the test area compared with the control area:Table 2. :Cumulative Percentage Gain in Sales of Brand X in South London compared with North London.Test Period:	Cumulative Percentage Gain in Sales of Brand X	South London  (Film Area) Compared with North London (Control) Area.First 4 weeks to 29 Dec.  1951	+17%First 8 weeks to 26 Jan.   1952	+19%First 12 weeks to 23 Feb. 1952	+23%First 16 weeks to 22 Mar. 1952	+26%First 20 weeks to 19 Apr.  1952	+32%By the end of the 20-week test period, tonnage sales of the product in South London films area showed a gain of almost one-third in comparison with the North London control area.  Table 3.  Brand X’s share of the Market in both the North and South London areas.	North London (No Advertising Film)	South London Advertising FilmBase Period (20 weeks to Dec 1. 1951)	27%	26%Test Period:		                    4 Weeks to 29 Dec. 1951	26%	29%                    4 Weeks to 26 Jan.  1952 	28%	35%                    4 Weeks to 23  Feb  1952	26%	33%                    4 Weeks to 22  Mar. 1952	26%	35%                    4 Weeks to 19  Apr.  1952   	21%	33%Average for 20 Weeks to 19 Apr. 1952	26%	33%	Table 3 demonstrates that in the South London area the beginning of the film showings quickly led to a sharp rise in Brand X’s share of the total market. This increased market share was equivalent, over the 20 weeks of the test period, to approximately 7% of the total market and was maintained throughout the test. 	The existing historiography relating to cinema advertising during the 1950s should be viewed as embryonic and flawed. Kelly and Nevett have failed to acknowledge the transition away from advertising in feature films, to the creation of short direct advertising films. As a result the factors which they highlight as having worked against cinema advertising, are for the most part erroneous. The production of two minute advertising films offered companies an effective high quality method of increasing their market share. This is reflected both in the positive audience responses recorded in the BMRB survey, and the results from the BMRB cinema advertising test. The paucity of available data precludes any definitive conclusions from being made. Nonetheless managerial conservatism may provide, at least a partial explanation, for the opportunity which industry and advertising agencies failed to embrace during the 1950s.Appendix 1. The interviews were obtained at the following cinemas.Town	Cinema	Number of performances attendedBirmingham	Perry Bar Odeon	2Birmingham	Warley Odeon	2Birmingham	Handsworth Villa Cross	1Birmingham	Shirley Odeon	1Sutton Coldfield	Odeon	2Colchester	Headgate	2Colchester	Hippodrome	2Bromley	Gaumont	2Bromley	Odeon	1Dagenham	Heathway	2Dagenham	Grange	1Romford	Plazza	2Romford	Havanna	1Southend	Gaumont	2Southend	Odeon	1Appendix 2. Reasons given for wanting to see more advertising films like Lux Toilet SoapThought it amusing-interesting-unusual	47Amusing-funny	17Interesting	12Entertaining	8Very ingenious-original-clever	3Pleasing to see	2It’s short and interesting	2Makes a change-like to see all sorts	2Amusing for children	1Sort of film to tell children about at bath time	1Bright and cheery	1Helps to make up a programme	1Appendix 3.“Base Period” Shares of the Market (before film showings began).Control Area (North London)		Test Area (South London)14%	Brand A	14%24%	Brand B	24%35%	Brand C	36%27%	Brand X	26%Appendix 4. Brand X’s share of the market during the summer and early autumn, and during the four weeks immediately prior to the film launchPeriod	North London 	South London 8 weeks to 8 September 1951	26%	28%8 weeks to 3 November  1951	27%	26%4 weeks to 1 December  1951 	27%	25%Average for 20 Weeks	27%	26%Appendix 5. The percentage of shops handling each of the four brands in the two areas during the four weeks immediately before film showings began in South London. 	North London 	South London Brand X	79%	82%Brand A	95%	95%Brand B	87%	89%Brand C	68%	73%                 Appendix 6. The stock position of Brand X in the two test areas.Period ending	North London 	South London14th July 1951	29%	29%3 November 1951	29%	30%1st December 1951	29%	33%Appendix 7. Tonnage Index of Total Market Sales per week:	North London (No Advertising Film)	South London Advertising FilmBase Period (20 weeks to Dec 1. 1951)	100	100		Test Period:		                    4 Weeks to 29 Dec. 1951	123	127                    4 Weeks to 26 Jan.  1952 	125	121                    4 Weeks to 23  Feb  1952	130	131                    4 Weeks to 22  Mar. 1952	134	136                    4 Weeks to 19  Apr.  1952   	105	109		Average for 20 Weeks to 19 Apr. 1952	123	125Appendix 8. Percentage of Shops Handling Brand X.	North London (No Advertising Film)	South London Advertising FilmEnd of base period (4 weeks ending 		 Dec 1. 1951)	79%	82%		End of test period (4 weeks ending 19 Apr. 1952)	73%	81%