Lab coats in HollywoodP7 – pre-product placement establish brand as futuristic. A benefit of scientific consultancy for companies including RCA General Electric, IBM, Bell Telephone P9 - Use science to create drama, visual iconographyP23 – “many in the scientific community believe that scientific depictions in fictional media have been detrimental to science literacy an to public attitude towards science” “factually wrong, scientists are portrayed as evil or socially apathetic, scientific knowledge is misused.” “deep rotted fears of science and scientific research”   can this be applied to chemicals and chemists? P24-25 Issues of direct witnessing – see something for self – Gould Indirect witnessing – Shapin and Schaffer  Newspapers as “virtual witnessing technologies allow phenomena demonstrations and events to be witnessed by people who were not thereP50 – Todd Gitlin – study of network tv  Inside Prime Time 2000  - -control of image portrayed by mediaP50 – Jan Golinski shows how chemists in nineteenth century Britain convinced the public of the discipline’s value through news paper adverts, posters displayed at lecture halls and accounts of lectures in pop magazines and editorial cartoons ref 23 ch3  Science as Public Culture 1992Ch1 Ref 26 and 27   A Irwin and M Michael Science Social Theory and Public Knowledge. A Irwin *Citizen Science* 1995 
G Gerbner “Science on Television: How it AFfects Public Conceptions” *Issues in Science and Technology* 3, no 3 1987 p109-115 

Rae Goodell - visible scientists CH3 ref4   *The Visible Scientists* 1977 Boston— if associations with legitiamte media endeavors liek documentaries could hinder a scientists reputation within the scientific community, then connections wth fictional media should be even more problematic.  Incredibly innacurate science - tarnish reputation
Kirby did not find that the scientists he interviewed thought that their reputation could be damaged - more likely to consider raised profile a positive. Respect for trying to improve sci accuracy, jealous of opportunity to work in Hollywood. Rise of celeb culture in 1990s possible reason

p58 sometimes accept non monetary payment - e.g. the chemicals and kit used as set dressing - “we had chems for two years, which saved us thousands of dollars bascially from  buying stuff. That was a big deal...”  some universities made the decision for the advisors - university’s intellecutal property, therefore the advisor is not remunerated, the uni is.  Duty as scientisit to impart k to uneducated public inc filmmakers

p59 growth of PUS momvent in 80s and 90s (ref 54  Gregory and Miller *Science in Public* 1998 ) reinforce belief that scientists should give advise freely vs provide speicalservice - compensation

p87 invisible technician served better than senior scientist - touchs liek inclusion of recognisable boxes of dustfree tissues, common reagents

p105 fact checking - if it were public science, the film makers owuld have sturgged with possible negative repercussions from deviating from a well known fact. Folk science is considered well established truth that appears to be common sense.  Difficult to challenge long standing cultural belief, making folk science as proplematic for filmakers as public sicnece. Scientific reality (where it is against folk science) can undercut a film’s authenticiy in an audience’s eyes. Circular process of ingraining conceptions of science that subsequent texts need to include them however inaccurate, which then reinforces misconceptions. For the lay public, deviation from folk science would appear the same as devisation from public sicnece. 

106 filmaking constraints: budget, visual dramatic technical. p107 Now easier to correct some inaccuracies post production using CGI 

p115 innacuracy having ramifications for real wolrd deabates about nuclear energy’s saftey.  - born out of misconceoptions of science, of the way that nuclear reacotrs work, out of the rear that people have o fnuclear reactors.     Nuclear experts would spot the problem - a core meltdown would mean radiation exposure, not a nuclear explosion. The idea of a nuclear reactor exploding like a nuclear bomb enters public’s mind because of the portrayal in the film = dangerous. 

p141  Given the choice between an Earth destroying asteroid and the planet’s graudal decline due to changing environmentla conditions, film makers are going to choose the more visually interesting and dramatically exciting asteroid impact wevery time. Always priviliege the visual and dramatic. p142 the uncertainty of unsettle dscience justifies filmatkers artistic licence and a consultan’ts scientific expertise validates their choices. As long as *their* scientific consultant says something that is good enough. 

Fiction provided an open free space to put forward speculative conceptualisations. Narrative storyline contributes to the believability of scenarios by providing audiences iwth explanations and rationales for why events are unfolding. cinema acts as “a device of truth” by imprating a legitimising effect on emerging or controversial scientific ideas (Ronald Thomas, ref 44 *DEtective fiction and the rise of forensic science 2004*) 

**Susan Sontag** imagination of disaster 1950 CH8 ref3   in the Science Fiction Film REader ed G Rickman (Bod nor OB have this) 
films offer audiences pleasure in watching the “Aesthetics of destruction: whic presenting moraliaty plays abou tdangers inherent to sci and technolgy. 
1950s cinema highlighted the dangers of science the tide has turned with rgard to disater films in the 90s and 2000s. No longer about scintific perils. Highlight our need to acquire sci k and new tch to prevent these diasaters. 

p171 alert public to a hazard - but what can people do about it? 
 	“if the film has a ring of truth to it, people will walk out thinking, Jesus, that story may have been fiction, but it could happen couldn’t it? But if it’s clearly just science fiction, they’ll write it off like the latest Sylvester Stallone movie”.  Which would be too bad, says Jahrling, becuase only a fired up public will favor spending research dollars on vaccines and oher precautions against an obscure killer virus before it goes global, not after”

p173 1976 Gregory Minor, Richard Hubbard and Dale Brinden baugh formed MHB Technical ASsociates after leaving GE. They toured country as advisors for antinuclear groups while testifying at antinuclear power hearings. Their film consulting work complement their other advocacy activities and this allowed the to graphically illustrate their hypothetical disaster scenario in a film that was guarnteed to be seen by millions of people. They were able to provide real life incidents which happened separately, e.g. defective pump supports, doctored xrays of faulty equipment and a monitoring device wholse need sticks to help filmmakers create a possible acident scenario involving anuclear power plant. an accident scenario theat they had been traveling aroudn the countyr telling peopel would eventually happen. The China Syndrome was released in 1979, 12 days before the Three Mile Island disaster happened. News commentators at the time noted the resemblence. 
p174 confusion of possiliblty vs probably because film events apeared to be happening in real life. Three Mile Island spokes people constant references to the film did not help the public dissociate the two. “we are not in a China Syndrome situation”

p176 China Syndrome began a second wave of Hollywood env films that moved away from the genre of eco horror towards the genres of docudrama and biopic. These second wave films differed from earlier eco films by focusing on corporate responsibility and local env issues as in  A Civil ACtion (case 1980s, book 1996, film 1998) and Erin Brockovich (case 1993, film 2000). Not depicting scencarios that could happen, but those that did happen. Spark outrage and generate public action to prevent similar scenarios happening again. 

p233 consultants find that popularixation through fictional films allows them to efectiely communicate their scientific ideas and conceptions to the nonspecialiset audience. The presentation withint the ciniematic framework can convince the public of the validity of ideas and create public excietement about research agendas or nascent tech. 

p172 “Historically public health and env issues are the two primary science based social concerns for which cinematic cautionary tale were made with scientists help.” Graphic depiction of gloval disasters - scientists working on env films are not appealing for more research funding but are pleasing for political action. By the 1970s the deteriorating natural environment became a high profile issues bth for the public and the sci comminity. The decade remians a high water mark for env movies: Silent Running 1971, ZPG 1972, Soylent Green 1973. Scientists involvement in these message films is in line with the strong political activism within sci comm in the late 60s and 70s. 
Ch2 ref 3 G Gerbner “Science on Television: How it affects public conceptions” Issues of Science and Technology 3, 3 1987A Tudor Monsters and Mad ScientistsWeingart Muhl and Pansegrau Of power maniacs and unethical geniuses, PUS 12, 3, 279-287The Science Fiction Film Reader – ed G Rickman 2004 -  S. Sontag The Imagination of disaster