Timeline
1876 – Germany, Fritz Henkel founds company Henkel &Co, Dusseldorf, launches Universal-Waschmittel, heavy uty detergent 1878 – first brand name detergent takes German market by storm: Henkel’s Beich-soda (cleaching soda) is a powder made from soda and water glass. (What is water glass?)1907 – Persil is launched, worlds first self-actin detergent. Perborate and Silicat = persil1909 – Persil launched in UK1915 – Womens Institute set up in UK , supported by the Agricultural Organisations Society 1920 – Henkel launch first household cleaner – Ata scouring powder1921 – Henkel’s Bleichsoda is renamed Henko, auxillary agent: Saok withHenko, wash with Persil and rinse with Sil. 1921 Soap powder for use in washing machines introduced In US (Chipso, Procter & Gamble, US) 1922 – birth of the Weisse Dame – white lady in advertising Persil (Henkel, Germany)1924 – Procter and Gamble are the first compny to conduct deliberate data-based research with consmers. Improve consumer understanding, aniticpate needs. 1924 – Lever Bros find out that Brunner Mond have been selling cheaper alkali to CWS, despite promising Lever Bros it would  not. 1926 Merchandise Marks Act laid down various requirements including showing country of origin (see also 1938) 1927 – Persil Institute set up, pioneering customer after-care. Continued as the care line.1929 – Henkel launch Imi diswashing detergent and household cleaner


1931- Henkel get into advertising using films – Three minutes for the housewife, Laundry – Washing – Well-being1932 Launch of worlds first synthetic detergent: Fewa
1932 - October nationwide Hunger March to London, 2500 marchers demonstrate against aboloition iof the Means Test and Anomalies Act and cuts in social services. 1933 First household detergent launched in US, Dreft (Procter & Gamble) 
1934 - February, nationwide Hunger March protesting against bill that set unemployment assistance rates at national level could not be influenced locally,  local Public Assistance Committes had been replaced by the national Unemployment Assistance Board. 
1934 J. Walter Thompson became first agency to set up Packaging Dept., designing, among other brands, Kit Kat, Black Magic, Polo, Smarties, Horlicks and many Kelloggs packs
1936 - October, Jarrow March, North East to London. Extreme poverty, one of the two grocery shops had closed, 74% unemployment, ship building. Little done. (1938 ship breaking and engineering works est, 1939 steelworks est)
1938 ISBA / IPA produced first survey into listening patterns of sponsored radio programmes 1938 – Women’s Voluntary Service established1939     Second World War began 3 September. During the war “a second Ministry of Information mobilised public opinion through iconic campaigns such as ‘Make  Do and Mend” and ‘Dig for Victory’”1939 First TV commercials on regular US  TV service, NBC / W2XBC New York City  (Socony Vacuum Oil, General Mills & Ivory Soap)1939 Cancer Act forbade advertisements claiming cures or advising remedies1940?? – the use of rabbit skins in coats for Russia. NFWI supported Mrs Churchill’s Aid to Russia – WI members raised rabbits, cured pelts, made coats, waistcoats, hoods and caps lined with rabbit fur for Russian women.  (How did they cure the pelts?)  1940-45 Government expenditure on advertising during WW II totalled some £9.5m. During the war the Government received a discount of 2½% on all space orders, with larger spaces allowed than other advertisers, who were restricted by paper/space rationing 1941 – Procter and Gamble establish consumer relations department. (Which country? )
1942 - Penguin’s first handbook - Growing Soft Fruit
1943 – Ministry of Food appealed to women’s voluntary orgs to help the Food Advice Campaign. 1946 – Procter and Gamble launch Tide. Popular, is the country’s (UK?) leading laundry product by 19491946 – National  Council of Women call on British Statndards Insistution to turn attention to consumer goods
1948 - River Boards Act - combined responsbilities for land rainage, fishersies and pollution prevention. Poweres trenthedn with further Rivers (Prevention of Polln) Acts 1951 nd 1961
1949 – Henkel launch Perwoll, light duty detergent1950 – Persil is relaunched after stopping production during the war (govt prescription) but now contains optical brighteners. (Germany)1951 – Pril powder launched (Germany) dishwashing detergent 1951 - Women’s Advisory Committee began to advise regularly on quality standnards and operation of the Kitemark labelling scheme1952 – December 4000 people killed by smog in London 1955 - WAC became Consumer Advisory Council1955 First UK TV commercial (Gibbs SR Toothpaste) on opening of Independent Television (ITV), 22 September – agency Young & Rubicam1955                Other ads on first night of ITV were: Kraft Cheese Slices (claimed by J. W. Thompson to have been second ad), Cadbury’s Drinking Chocolate   (often said to have been second ad), Guinness, Batchelor’s Peas, *Brillo,* Crosse & Blackwell, Dunlop Rubber, Esso (petrol), Ford, Remington Rand, Shredded Wheat, *Surf*, Watneys, National Benzole (petrol), Woman (magazine), Coty (fragrance), Brown & Polson (cornflour/foods), Express Dairy Co., Crompton Lamps, *Lux*, Summer County Margarine, E. K. Cole (Ecko Radio & TV)1955 Advertisers Weekly (the highest weekly selling trade journal) published  guidelines on TV advertising: “Product demonstrations must be believable”,  “Use the kitchen for believability”, “Wild claims look absurd on TV” among them1955 First Fluoride toothpaste (Crest, Procter & Gamble, US)1956 £10.5m spent on UK TV advertising in its first year. Advertising expenditure overall up from £157 million (1954 figure) to £196 million, 0.93% of GNP1956 – first advertising spot ever aired on German TV promoted Persil1956 – Clean Air Act passed as a result of the 1952 smog1956 - Consumer Association founded by  Michael Young1957 – release of radioactive material from Windscale, leading to name change to Sellafield. 1957 - October, Which? Consumer magazine launched 7 October
1957 - December, The Observer newspaper starts a column on Consumer Guidance, by Eiryls Roberts of Which?1957 – Henkel launch their first speciality detergent for washing machines, Dixan1959 – Henkel - Launch of Pril liquid dishwashing detergent, launch of Persil 291961 – Germany sets first European standards for biodegradability of sap and petrochemical equivalents. 1961 - Research Institute for Consumer Affairs RICA (set up by CA)
1961 - Jeyes Sanitary Compounds bought and will take over the manufacture and sales of Scrubbs cloudy ammonia and other household products of Scrubbs co. 
1961 - Thalidomide withdrawn from UK market (licenced from 1958)
1962 - Silent Spring published, Rachel Carson
1962 – Launch of first products for automatic household dishwashers – detergene and rinse aide (Somat-Reiniger and Somat-Klarspuler1963 – Consumer Council set up, ties to industry which was always a weakness. 1964 Home perm TV commercials dropped (long straight hair became more  fashionable) 
1965 - River authorities (27) with additional powers for water conservation supersed the river boards - Water Resources Act 1963
1965 - The Guardian newspaper start a column called “Readers New Lines” where readers write in to recommend brand name products for solutions, the writer Jean Redhead or Elizabeth Smart will often test them out. 
1965 - spaceship earth Adlai Stevenson - speech to UN we travel to gether, passengers on a little space ship
1966 - Spaceship Earth, Barbera Ward economist
1966 – Launch of Weisser Reise, White Giant, heavy duty laundry detergent Henkel Germany
1966 - Aberfan disaster October, collapse of colliery spoil heap - described as perhaps the first time that the potential for public harm was realised  - see Chem plant site selction and the Env Pne ady joint symposium talk.
1966 – Monopolies Commission – detergent giants Unilever and P&G should reduce their prices by an average of 20% and the advertising expenses by 40%. 
1968 - Population Bomb, Paul Ehrlich (and Anne, uncredited)
1968 Trade Descriptions Act made it an offence to apply a “false trade description” (in effect, any statement that might influence a purchasing  decision) to any goods 1968 – Clean Air Act 1968 Tall Chimneys for factories to disperse better. 
1968 - Operating Manual Spaceship EArth, Buckminster Fuller
1969 - Brobat Beauties - glamour models to sell disinfectant in stores - selling point was new pvc bottles, which were lighter weight than their glass versions. Money off, gift offer of beauty pack. 
1970 – European Conservation Year, govt white paper Prtection of the environment fight against pollution. 
1970 - establishment of permanent Standing Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution 1970 Germaine Greer’s The Female Eunuch published1970 - Con Gov dissolved Consumer Council1970s – Persil was the first to picture a man doing the laundry1971 Persil priced at p per lb (pound) (?) 
1971 - Spaceship Earth mentioned at Earth Day 
1972 - January  - Blueprint for Survival published in special edition of The Ecologist
1972 - UN Stockholm - June highlighted complex relationships within the world ecosystem, stressed human dimension
1972 - European Communities Act  - Britain hands over some powers to EC
1972 – Con Gov appointed Minister for Consumer Affairs within DTI1972 Shoe polish advertising began a marked decline 1972 – Henkel launch Der General liquid household cleaner1973 Fair Trade Act and Office of Fair Trading set up 
1974 - regional water authorities set up (ten of them in Eng and Wales) with resonsibiilites for whoe water cycle inc supply, draininage and sweage tmt, river polln prevention
1974 TV adspend dropped for the first time, from £210m to £195m at end of year 1974 Annual TV ad spend fell on flour and baking products (thrift indicators) 1974 – No more drying up : With improved Pril (Germany)
1975 - Flixborough explosion - chemical plant
1974 – Lab Gov established Secretaty of State for Prices and Consumer Protection
1974 - Health and Safety Commission established
1974 - Control of Pollution Bill (first introdued as Protection of the Env Bill) - Labour. Thatcher as opposition supported the Bill likely to have  greater more lasting impact on the quality of life in many part of Britian than most other measures.”
1975 - creation of National Consumer Council.  Consumers should have central agency for representation, as unions etc.  1975 - Sex Discrimination & Equal Pay Acts forbade ads indicating an intention to discriminate on grounds of gender
1976 - Seveso disaster, Italy - explosion at chem plant released 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD, a dioxin) into residential area (vapour) -  pregnancy fears, but all 460 births were normal (though 26 opted for termination) but most severe was chloracne - 193 cases
1976 - Ads indicating an intention to discriminate on racist grounds forbidden under Race Relations Act
1977 EC outlined principles to guide env policy
1978 - Evacuation from Love Canal, US, after investigation - Hooker Chemical sold site to Niagra Falls School Board 1953. Urban planning scandal. Land use, restrictions, infomration. 
1979 - Select Committee on the Environment
1983 Harrods terrorist bombing 1983 – Dixan is launched  as the first phosphate free laundry detergent in Germany. 
1984 − 3 December Union Carbide Bophal disaster, 
1985 New edition of The IBA Code of Advertising Standards and Practices, with special mention of advertising to children, privacy, religion, subliminal advertising, "unacceptable products & services" etc 1987 – Persil liquid is launched (Germany?) 1987 – Association for Consumer Research created to serve consumers in the public interest, while the Consumer Assoication remained as a comparative testing service for subscribers.
1988 - July, Camelford water pollution, accidental contamination of drinkign water with aluminium sulphate. As the sulphate broke down it produced sulphuric acid, stripping a “cocktail of chemicals from the pipe networks as well as lead and copper piping in peopl’s homes”
1988 - December 21, Lockerbie bombing / disaster, Scotland  — what was the explosive? Not homemade? i.e.semtex/ gelginite/ dynamite1992 – UK Eco-Labelling Board set up to scrutinise cleaners.  Voluntary submission of products – none of the manfuacterers submitted.  1996 – National Consumer Council – Green Claims report. Boasting biodegradability when had complied with basic EU standards of 80% breakdown in 3 hours (i.e. has stopped foaming): Daz, Biological Persil. http://www.henkel.co.uk/cps/rde/xchg/henkel_uke/hs.xsl/89_UKE_HTML.htm Chinese migration1950s – grew rapidly Caribbean1948 – Windrush1962 – Commonwealth Immigration Act (restriction)Sikh1950s-60s from Punjablater from east AfricaMuslim1950s – 1960s escape division of british India into Pakistan and India – violenceConstruction of dam in Mirpur district 1960s displaced many peoplehttp://www.unilever.com.ph/brands/hygieneandwelbeing/aroundthehouse/ 