Chemicals and the environmentSEllen – 1910s-1930 industrial hygenists assembled themselves (US)Air pollution dealt with quite differently to water pollution – water fixated on bacterial hazards (typhoid, cholera) and nonpathological effects of industrial chemicals. Industrial hygiene highlighted ipact of industrial chemicals on the human body, later taken up by Rachel Carson et cal. Previously arguments were originally in terms of economy and aesthetics, later focusing on health. Who is the equivalent of pioneer Hamilton (US) in the UK? Mentions study by Andrews and Osgood  - phosphorus jaw – and it sounds like industrial hygiene in UK and Europe might be further ahead than in the US. Interest in how chronic exposure is quite different to infection types, not contagious so can’t demonstrate Koch’s postulate etc. Technological methods also helped to advance the field – in 1912 dust sampling would take hours and only tell you the weight of the dust. By 1920s  more complex methods could give a chemical and physical analysis after 30 mins of sampling. Relationship to engineers – strong. 1930s- 1940s US biomedical interst focuses on chronic disease. Private side of public health – sanitary science, domestic hygieneIndustrial health, hygiene in UKHow industrial legislation or activities trickled down (or not) to home life. Campaigns that started in industry, such as “Safety first” applied to home life. Contamination, spill, risk, effluent, residue, measurement, detection. 