{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1347\cocoasubrtf570
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red191\green191\blue191;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\sb240\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Who used photographic chemicals at home?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140

\b0\fs24 \cf0 While instruction manuals and magazines portrayed a domestic darkroom as being not necessarily being permanently static, large or expensive, in an attempt to encourage more photographers to try developing their photographs at home, it remained a minority activity most often pursued by adolescent and young men. Neathercoat imagined 'innocent-looking' cyanide sticks 'in the hands of an enthusiastic, unsuspecting schoolboy' and the 'possible calamity to himself and to {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://492C22B3-E6C2-4DF1-9391-6F030ED39F19"}}{\fldrslt others'.}} Although photography was stressed as not having to be an expensive hobby which made it suitable for schoolboys, it did require investment in camera, film, measures, a thermometer, trays, bowls, clips, as well as paper and chemicals, which restricted the pastime to people who could afford to make this outlay. Oliver Sacks described his childhood passion for developing and colouring photographs at home, and as the son of two {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://8A653AA3-DE9E-4535-B0E6-E16DBF80947A"}}{\fldrslt doctors,}} fits the profile of a typical middle to upper middle class child for whom this type of expenditure was not problematic.  \
In the displays at NMeM, home darkrooms are not depicted as a cheaper alternative to sending film away despite pointing out that when Kodak first offered this service it was expensive, costing the equivalent of around two weeks wages for an average working man. By the 1930s, it was not necessarily always more economical to process film at home, and the activity was promoted as an interest, although this view was not held by all authors who described photographers who handed off their films for developing and printing as "lazy" or "{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://33BAD602-96A5-4FCE-846B-8958A6908B38"}}{\fldrslt ignorant".}} However, what was affordable or considered value for money would of course vary from user to user. Nevertheless, by inference, users of photographic chemicals could be classified as not-lazy, and not-ignorant, as well as careful, meticulous and methodical. \

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clmrg \clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Developing
\b0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 Roll films \'96 spools up to 8 exposures\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 6d\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 Fine grain development\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 9d\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 Leica, Retina or similar spools\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 1/6\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 Films packs/ plates all sizes up to 3.5 x 2.5\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 2/-dozen\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clmrg \clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 Printing
\b0 \cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 Plates/ packs all sizes up to 3.5 x2.5\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 2/- dozen\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 Spools in strips of 3\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 3/-\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 Enlarged postcards (black)\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 4d each\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalc \clshdrawnil \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf2 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw1\brdrcf0 \clpadl100 \clpadr100 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 Enlarged postcards (sepia)\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720
\cf0 6d each\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sb120\sa120

\i \cf0 Table 1: Selected developing and printing prices, April 1938 JT Chapman Ltd, Manchester(MOSI)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140
\cf0 Should now of course compare this to prices for chemicals
\i0 \
\
In a display on flash photography, amateur photographic chemical users are described as "adventurous" and "keen", and willingness to use explosive illumination sources indoors does suggest adventurous, if not somewhat foolhardy as the powder could not always be relied on to behave as expected. However, should the flash powder injure the user, they were depicted as 'unfortunate' or 'unlucky' with the chemical purely held to blame, rather than user error in storing, measuring out or igniting it.   \
At NMeM darkroom users are associated with photographic competitions run by societies. The added layer of complexity that home processing opened up, increased creative scope beyond composition and lighting. This helps to build a picture of artistic, competitive users, who skilfully manipulated images, as well as chemicals. NMeM show that women were members of some photographic societies, but emphasise their minority status and state that "relatively few had the time or money to devote to photography as a serious hobby". This statement was not supported by an accompanying image of a woman working in a well equipped darkroom, although she could have been employed to work there. \
It has been suggested that the technical aspects of home processing allowed men to carve out a niche in a hobby where manufacturers had been perceived as catering to women, with lighter, easier to use cameras and frivolous colour {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://B1CB6F54-7432-4631-83A4-3DEFA98FE876"}}{\fldrslt snaps.}} The technicality of home processing is one that can be engaged with on various levels, provided that kits did not completely displace pure photographic chemicals.\
The question of home processing as a masculine pursuit was not explored further at NMeM, as is often the case in museum displays where space and text is limited. Changes are indicated by the inclusion of a book published in 1950 "
\i Photography for Boys and Girls
\i0 " with a cover illustration of an aproned girl watching as a boy inspects a section of film that he has been developing. Inside the book, there are no similar illustrations and the images included of children composing and taking photographs are all of girls, presumably Pog, Celia and Judy to whom the book is dedicated to. If children could pursue this activity with pocket money, the costs must have declined and the author was making an effort to say that it is not simply the domain of serious adults. Indeed, it was as children or young people that chemical manufacturers Ilford imagined beginning their hobby, rather than coming to it when they were more mature {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://307E0BAB-8F6C-4F0C-94DD-A0CC822922AC"}}{\fldrslt adults.}} \
This transition from a hobby pursued by wealthy adults with abundant leisure time to one that could be taken up by children is interesting not only because of the changing financial costs, but also because this was occurred with a parallel development in the presentation of ready mixed chemicals that were simpler and more convenient to use. Kits were advertised with the slogan "No more messy chemicals", a demonstration of how measuring out, mixing and pouring chemicals was considered to be messy and possibly even preventing someone beginning or continuing the practice of home processing. The author of 
\i Photography for Boys and Girls 
\i0 thanked Ilford and Johnsons of Hendon for help preparing the book, as well as recommending their concentrated liquid products or ready-mixed powder preparations by name, with no mention of the option of making up {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://757C6FAA-D4BB-44B8-863A-14715AF2D333"}}{\fldrslt formulae.}} Similar to strategies used to promote hardware as simple where women and children demonstrated how easy and foolproof cameras were to use, the direction of books on home processing to children also highlights the ease of use of these new formulations and kits. \
Developing one's own photographs not only gave control over the end product, but could also avoid processors seeing, and judging, the content of the photographs. Social historian Erika Hanna wrote of self-censorship with respect to subject matter, when she discovered a collection of photographs that did not include any of a long term, same-sex partner, contrasted to the use of photographs made to frame and present previous heterosexual {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://36089665-347C-4AC7-8F46-1B059B7F1B4D"}}{\fldrslt relationships.}} If the photographer had also developed her own photographs would this have allowed her more freedom to portray her long lasting, intimate relationship? Perhaps that person was simply not keen on being photographed, but it is an interesting point to consider especially with the advent of digital photography, where images are instantly available without the mediation of any external organisations or individuals to judge and censor. Those photographers who developed images at home did not have to concern themselves with the eyes of others, and coupled with the nude studies were printed in photographic magazines, this lent home developers as a group of users an air of seediness. Not all of those photographs would have been so tasteful. In Kenyon's study of 
\i Amateur Photographer
\i0  magazine, he described nudes as appearing rarely, but I was naively surprised at the regularity of nudes and swimwear shots, as well as those that experimented with light and texture of diaphanous fabrics over a nude body.\
However, not just amateurs developed photographs at home. A National Trust property in Liverpool, The Hardman's House, is an interesting example of both a home and a photographers' portrait studio business. Chambre and Margaret Hardman had two darkrooms, one in the basement for the business, and another which they named the Barnston darkroom, upstairs near their living quarters that they used solely for their leisure pursuits. Although this duplication of equipment and chemicals may initially seem unnecessary, the space needed to process the portraits may well have prevented the pursuit of leisure photography, as well as providing financial clarification when it came to accounting for the use of consumables. A description of the commercial darkroom as "cramped and cluttered" contrasts with the orderly appearance of the Barnston room and lends weight to the idea of this space as something of a sanctuary that the Hardmans spent most of their free time in. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 Hanna 2014 p94 Usage and ownership were gendered. Technical photography was geared towards men. 1950s symbol of the Dublin Amateur Camera club was monochrome depiction of an oversized man with tripod and camera straddling O'connell St, .. Ever cheaper lighter and easier to use cameras of the amateur market were increasingly marketed as being tailored to the needs of women. 1920s ads in The camera featured many new techs aimed at women, to photograph small children, represented photography as key part in constituting and solidifying the family. Featured articles by a female photographer 'Focal Plane Jane' who gave advice to female photographers. Marketing simple techs towards women was followed when colour film was introduced, often seen by photography enthusiasts as not being a 'serious' medium, it was primarily marketed as a tech advance for domestic '{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://D85B4105-9A19-42AD-8C87-B8D41E43DC30"}}{\fldrslt snaps'.}} \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140
\cf0 \
}