{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1347\cocoasubrtf570
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\sb240\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Using photographic chemicals at home\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Developing photographs needed a dedicated space, at least temporarily dedicated, if not a permanently set up dark space. Clean running water was desirable, but not a requirement, and diagrams of rigs that would fit over baths or utility room sinks, then could be packed away were published along with more more permanent installations. In the Kodak gallery at NMeM visitors can view a Pepper's Ghost illusion, where pressing a button reveals the transformation of a domestic bathroom into a darkroom. Hobby magazines demonstrated receptiveness to users' different needs and means, and published letters requesting details of modest darkrooms for domestic spaces as well as letters from those who wanted to share the pared down, portable arrangements that home processors had created themselves.\
As well as the space and equipment to develop the photographs, a place to weigh out chemicals, dissolve powders or make dilutions was needed, as well as a place to store all the requisite bottles, mixtures and powders. Cleanliness was very important in getting a good end result, so the usability of the space sought for making up developing solutions was described in terms of being able to wipe down and clear up any spills, to avoid contamination or spoiling the photographic solution, rather than being mindful of other potential users of the space. Kitchens were considered unsuitable, because they were used for so many different, dirty tasks that although they were inherently easy to wipe up, the risk of contaminating the photography solutions was too high. Utility rooms were preferred, with more limited laundry and hobby uses, or bathrooms, similarly with limited purposes related to becoming clean, their inherently dirty processes left unspoken. Towel fluff was considered the worst contaminant {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://6C86A393-2076-4027-AD87-6D5C42B43211"}}{\fldrslt here,}} which fits the exhortations to housewives that bathrooms should always be scrupulously clean. Under the stairs was another domestic space commonly requisitioned for use as a workspace and darkroom. \
As dedicated photographers, the Hardman's chose their property on Rodney Street not only with respect to the city's geography and accessibility to clients, but also with darkroom suitability in mind. Rodney Street is referred to as the Harley Street of Liverpool and the house had formerly been used as a doctors' premises, so sinks with running water were installed throughout, allowing the Hardman's to easily convert one of these rooms to accommodate their pastime. Their private darkroom was situated towards the back of the house, its single, small window could be simply blacked out with a blind. With their permanent darkrooms, the Hardman's stored all their chemicals on wall mounted shelves, in glass fronted cabinets and on shelves under the processing sinks. Photographic chemicals did not encroach on other domestic spaces in this household. However, domestic items did get stored in the private darkroom, as demonstrated by the bottles of preserved fruit under the sinks. \
What was striking about the visible packaging in the Barnston darkroom, was that it was all bottles and jars, there didn't appear to be any paper or cardboard packs. Manuals advised never to keep the chemicals and reagents in paper bags and the professional photographers evidently made sure that their supplies were kept properly. It also suggests that they perhaps preferred to dilute concentrated liquids rather than to weigh and dissolve chemicals. I could not spot any scales for weighing dry ingredients, but could see graduates and measures for liquids. In contrast to this, the collection at NMeM is dominated by paper and cardboard packets, some of which contain bottles, and would likely have been reused and disposed of by the Hardmans. Typical packaging at NMeM is of thin cardboard sleeves around foil wrapped packets of preweighed reagents, which must be dissolved in water in the order given on the instructions. Slim cardboard boxes contain similar foil packets. Also noteworthy on the subject of branded packages is that although the company and brand names appeared, the active chemical ingredients such as metol or elan, hydroquinone, borax do appear. The formulae for these products were readily available, but the convenience of being able to skip weighing out and storing constituent chemicals was obviously appealing to many home processors. \
One author of a practical photography manual described how the airing cupboard, to his mind, inexplicably, was the most frequently chosen place of storage for the bottles of carefully prepared and labelled solutions that the home developers made up. He advised storing them instead on a windowsill where sunlight could kill moulds that could grow and spoil the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://9098E63B-7D14-4F86-8A11-0228D3E378AF"}}{\fldrslt solutions.}} For chemicals that must be used for their purpose of developing photographs, in a specially constructed darkroom, putting them in direct light seems counter intuitive. The question remains though of why the airing cupboard, when any other cupboard would have provided this dark, protective environment without the additional warmth traditionally associated with airing cupboards. \
Ventilation was a concern for these chemical users, but perhaps not an overwhelming one especially as the chemical processes were simplified. Historian Bill Jayon documented that photographic journals for amateurs and professionals alike had been urging their readers to ventilate their workspaces properly since the 1890s, and regularly running articles on health issues to do with improper ventilation, as well as effects on the skin from immersion in solutions. These concerns were not always explicitly related to any specific chemical fumes, but more often referred to "stuffiness" which would make you sleepy, when the process required you to stay awake to get the best {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://3FA0B813-179B-4F57-8C53-3EC86D58420F"}}{\fldrslt results.}}\
In 1944, Amateur Photographer carried an article on making a home made chemical balance. It opened with a statement that indicated their view of how people used photographic chemicals at home. "Many keen amateurs although they delight in carrying out their own processing never dream of weighing out and making up their own {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://B155DCC3-ADF7-4A2C-BB7F-18E2BECC2593"}}{\fldrslt solutions."}} This sentence suggests that kits, or ready made concentrated solutions which the user diluted as appropriate were the main way that the chemicals were interacted with, rather directly buying and weighing out the individual chemical constituents. This is very different to the impression given by Shearcroft's 1942 manual, containing chapters of detailed information on weighing out and mixing up solutions, and possibly demonstrates the diversity of what actually happened. The practical article identified a lack of a suitable weighing machine as the key factor holding photographers back from this stage, not that they did not want to engage with the chemicals for any reason, or that solutions were more convenient, attractive in terms of cost, more readily available or less intimidating or reliable. This one article, presenting a homemade balance, cannot give a representative demonstration of all home developers attitudes and practices, but it is an interesting inclusion in a magazine, which continued publishing through the second world war, and can be considered to have known its audience and their activities quite well. \
}