{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1347\cocoasubrtf570
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\li432\fi-432\sb240\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Are these dangers related to their withdrawal/ restriction or concealment?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\sa140

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Where there any public calls for action? 
\i No? useful to compare to other chemicals where people did feel outraged that they were available. 
\i0 Why, when these chemicals could be misused with fatal consequences, was there not any public concern? Could this be to do with the perception of the users themselves, ie nerdy, not a threat, hobbyists, competant? What about the list of prohibited chemicals re sabotage? \
Could it be that the number of people requiring the chemicals was so low as to be unprofitable to continue? Is this a supply and demand problem? \
Another factor to consider is the type of film used, and the needs associated with developing it. The introduction of colour film certainly had implications for the chemicals required, and it created even more interest in kits suitable for this more complex process. The continual improvement of camera film meant that developing techniques also had to adjust. This shows that it is not simply the availability of chemicals that is a factor, but also the suitability of films for amateur processing methods. \
One of the products that should have been subject to scrutiny at the point of sale, at least during the second world war, was photographic flash powder. It was included on the list of Prohibited Chemicals compiled by the explosives group, discussed among home office officials and circulated around retailers of chemicals. It stands out on the list because flash powder is a mixture, not a chemical element, nor a compound. Also on the list was potash of nitrate, or potassium nitrate which was an ingredient in photographic flash powder. Magnesium powder, which when ignited burned with a bright white flame, good for illuminating photographic subjects, was not listed separately. However, flash powder itself did not seem to be the subject of much further discussion, its place on the list was not contested in the archived documents nor was any further information offered about the prevalence of its normal use, or the likelihood of it being used by a saboteur who had so many products to choose from. \
By the outbreak of the second world war, flash powder was already being replaced by flash bulbs which did not rely on a small fire and explosion to generate brightness. However, flash powder was still used by some amateur photographers until the 1960s, so this proposed tightening of sales might be expected to have been discussed in the press. Sales were not stopped, but the retailers were urged to consider the amount the were selling and to whom. In all probability, the amount photographers bought at a time were not large enough to constitute a significant threat. Tins of Johnson flashpowder contained 1, 4 or 8 ounces. 1 ounce of flash powder, could last around 43 portraits of individuals, as it was only used in small amounts at a time around two thirds of a gram. Larger groups demanded more illumination, using around 6 grams of powder.  However, as even using these small amounts could be dangerous, and caused even experienced, frequent users of it to be wary of their safety, there does seem to be sense behind the concern about the use of flashpowder in sabotage. As described earlier, dampness was a particular problem especially if the powder was damp, which caused it to detonate "like a small grenade" rather than provide light.  At the outbreak of hostilities [photographic flash powder] should be dealt with by legislation or Order to prevent general availability. List of 'prohibited chemicals'. 
\i When was flash powder in use? Suspect that it was early only. Bulbs in use by 30s, but only replacing flash powder by {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://7E1930CE-3454-4DA9-BC0E-136E5C71EDB5"}}{\fldrslt 1950s.}} 
\i0 \
\
}