Consumer Education A resources handbook for teachersConsumer education is a relatively recent addition to the curriculum… growing emphasis on the need for CE 23 examining boards now include consumer topics from science and social studies to history and home ec. Whichcraft a magazine for teachers and students was starte by CA in 1975. Book gives inspiration, information and reference. Cover surveying techniques and sampling. P16 – AdvertisingLooking at the code of advertising practice – ‘legal decent, honest and truthful’, identify language, devices, claims, target audiences, placement of ads to reach those audiences.P18-19 AerosolsBritish Aerosol Manufcrs Association has a Code of Practice for Labelling – warning about puncture, heat and confined space. Not just a container but also a dispenser and has to be paid for as such. Aerosols are laboursaving, they cannot be spilled, they do not evaporate, applied to inaccessible parts, some products keep longer in an aerosol can. Propellant issues.Look at diversity of aerosol products, special advantages, warning labels, diagram to show how it works. [ no entries for cleaning or chemicals, or consumables, but there are cosmetics]Eating for health  - specifically says that pesticide residues are not stored in the body. [Incorrect?] Complete safety can’t be proved  - but there is no evidence of any risk.Fireworks – p.55   Firework Makers Guild In 1976 9 million people in Britain bought a total of 132 million fireworks, just under 15 fireworks each. In that year there were 685 firework accidents, which involved people being treated by a hospital besides lots of minor ones. In 1977 there was one fatality, the first in siz years. In recent years the firework industry has stopped selling jumping crackers and flying fireworks, has more than halved the number of bangers made and agreed to sell most fireworks in boxed selections. The trade has also voluntarily agreed to limit the period during which fireworks are sold to three weeks before and a few days after 5 November.Laws controlling the mfc and sale of fireworks – most recent being Explosives (Age of Purchase) Act 1976.  __ Why do people have fireworks?! Could be my route into a non-white story?Labelling p.73-4Labelling can tell you, how to use or care, warn of dangers through using or misuing, tells about tests and approvals, acts as point of sal adverts (e.g illustrations on packaging), tells of what it is made eg chemicals in an instant pudding. Symbolic lableing increasingly important internationally, few people understand new hazard labelsSpecific task for students – Obtain the list of igredient from packets of such products as Angel Delight, or Dream topping. Read them to the rest of your class without identifying the products and ask them to guess what the products are. How do they react when you tell them the names of the products?Packaging p.92-93Consider accessibility, need, price, effectiveness, convenience.  Look at protection of contents, information like warnings and ingredients, conservation of raw materials, safety. Pollution p.94-5There are many things which can pollute our environment: for example, noise, chemicals, oil and litter. Controled by Law, proress e.g. smoke polln in London. Activities include “draw an oil pollution chain”, list ways which you think your local env is being polluted, imagine life without dust men, survey of annoying/distressing neighbourhood noises, sewage treatment. [No actual other mentions of chemical pollutions. ]Washing powders p.112 – 1142 major producers – Lever Bros and P&G advertise v heavily, esp on TV. In 1976 they spent over £4million on TV ads, which 1974 report on washing powders showed that how they washed had more effet than what they washed with. Anything that cleans, for instance water, is a detergent. Soap is a detergent made from mainly vegetable and  animal oil. Syntheti detergents are made from mineral oil, usually petroleum. May contain other things besides detergen, bleach, perfume, foam stabilisers brigheners or fluorescers, phospate. But the ads don’t tell you this, nor Is the info on the packet. Foam sabilisers in wp are there to stop the foam dying away. Many people equiate foam with a better wash. Auto machines need low-foaming powders, or cog drum, prevent  clothes moving freely. Brightness is not the same as cleanness – describes how it is just reflected light. Water hardness – effect of wasting soap. Draw a table of available washing powders, sizes and costs to work out the most economical. Consumer safety act 1978 (criminal ) to replace Consumer protection act 1961Control of pollution act 1974 (crminial) gives local authorities powers over waste disposal , water polln, noise, atmos pholln and public health. E.g. noise abadement zone. Explosives age of purchase – forbids sale of fireworks to anyone under 16. Penalty Is 200£ fine, similare for letting off fireworks in the street. Packaging council set up in May 1978 – code of practice to ensure good packaing, convenience of containers, opening, resealing, misleading containers as to the quantity or nature of the contents, inadequate protection of contents, wasteful with unnec price increases, , disposal of packaging, packaging which might have adverse effects on the contents. In index chemicals directs you to For hair – in which it just mentions colorants, Testing – animal testing (cosmetics), BP’s education dept, 