Household WasteNotes from: Slack, Gronow, Voulvoulis J Env Mgt.Royal Commision on Environmental Pollutoin 1970Deposit of Poisonous Waste Act 1972Control of Pollution Act 1974Hazardous household waste – leftover household products that contain corrosive toxic ignitable or reactive ingredients. (US EPA_Any material discarded by a household which id difficult to dispose of or which puts human health or the environment at risk because of its chemical or biological nature. LeachateAnnex IA – ‘Wastes displaying any of the properties listed in Annex III and which consist of: 2.	pharmaceuticals, medicines and veterinary compounds; 3.	wood preservatives; 4.	biocides and phyto-pharmaceutical substances (e.g. pesticides, etc.); 5.	residue from substances employed as solvents; 8.	mineral oils and oily substances; 9.	oil/water, hydrocarbon/water mixtures, emulsions; 12.	inks, dyes, pigments, paints, lacquers, varnishes; 13.	resins, latex, plasticizers, glues/adhesives; 16. photographic chemicals and processing materials’ may be classified as hazardous. •	-  AnnexIB(39)–‘materials resulting from selective waste collections from households and which exhibit any of the characteristics listed in Annex III’ can be considered hazardous. •	-  Annex I B (40) – ‘any other wastes which contain any of the constituents listed in Annex II and any of the properties listed in Annex III. •	-  AnnexII–‘Constituents of the wastes in Annex IB, which render them hazardous.. C5 nickel compounds; C6 copper compounds; C7 zinc compounds; C8 arsenic compounds; C11 cadmium, cadmium compounds; C16 mercury, mercury compounds; C18 lead, lead com- pounds; C21 inorganic cyanides; C23 acidic solutions/ solid form; C24 basic solutions/solid form; C33 pharmaceutical or veterinary compounds; C34 biocides and phyto-pharmaceutical substances; C36 creosotes; C39 phenols, phenol compounds; C40 halogenated solvents; C41 other organic solvents; C42 organohalogen com- pounds; C43 aromatic, polycyclic, heterocyclic com- pounds; C44/45 aliphatic/aromatics amines; C51 hydrocarbons.’ •	-  Annex III – Properties of wastes which render them hazardous: H1 Explosive; H2 Oxidizing; H3A Highly flammable; H3B Flammable; H4 Irritant; H5 Harmful; H6 Toxic; H7 Carcinogenic; H8 Corrosive; H9 In- fectious; H10 Teratogenic; H11 Mutagenic; H12 Sub- stances/preparations which release toxic gases; H13 Substances/preparations yielding hazardous sub- stances after disposal; H14 Ecotoxic. Acids and Alkalis not listed. Difficulty / concern over disposal of exposure chemicals in photography. – individual users? No legal requirement exists in uk for householders to separate hhw from general waste, enforcement v difficult. P40-41 “EU introduced recommendations and regulations restricting or banning the use of creosote, chromated copper arsenate wood treatments and various hair dyes. Identification and exclusion from household products of potentially dangerous new substances or heavy metals is improved, rendering the final waste product less hazardous than older similar products.”“Lists of ingredients and other info provided on labels of hazardus products may not contribute to a greater understanding of product risk during use and at disposal” Grey 2005Blundell, T., 2003. Chemicals in Products: Safeguarding the Environment and Human Health. 24th Report, Long-term Effects of Chemicals in th Daughton, C.G., Ternes, T.A., 1999. Pharmaceuticals and personal care products in the environment: agents of subtle change? Environ. Health Perspect. 107, 907–938. Grey, C.N.B., Nieuwenhuijsen, M.J., Golding, J., ALSPAC Team, 2005. The use and disposal of household pesticides. Environ. Res. 97, 109–115. 